---
title: The U.S. Elections - 1948
author: American Fraction of the Left Communist International
date: 1948
description: Published in the September-October 1948 issue of International Bulletin. From <https://archive.org/details/international_bulletin_1948-09_10>.
...

The leaders and parties in the electoral campaign of 1948 present a
picture of paradox. The conflict between Russian Imperialism and
Anglo-American Imperialism dominates all other issues. Within the
framework of this conflict, the mask for world Imperialism, the United
Nations, masquerades as the world public, impartial arbiter between
Easter and Western Imperialism while it is actually the world market
place for Eastern and Western Imperialism, for making deals on atomic
armament; partition of Germany, export and import of capital between
East and West; spheres of influence in the colonial and semi-colonial
areas. It is the mask under cover of which American Imperialism promotes
the Marshall Plan for the subjugation of the world. It is the cloak
under which Russia promotes the Moscow Imperialist plan. Together, they
add up to a War plan.

Internally, the drive of the capitalist class of the U.S. against the
working class sharpens. It saddles the working class with the
Taft-Harley law, no-strike injunctions, anti-radical and Stalinist spy
scares. This is the pattern for mobilization for Imperialist War III,
emphasized by the Military Draft.

President Truman and his competitor Thomas E. Dewey present themselves
as champions of freedom and liberty against the expansion of Russian
Imperialism, while they support military dictatorships in Greece, China,
Korea and Japan (MacArthur democracy). Truman and Dewey claim to be
leaders in the fight against war, yet they promote the Marshall Plan,
which is the political-economic phase of military measures in time of
war. They both support the military draft. They are, in words, for the
independence of all people, yet they promote the E.R.P. which makes the
whole of Western Europe dependent on U.S. Imperialism. Truman states
that the Republican Party is opposed to the working class and Dewey
states that the Democratic party is against labor. They are both right.
Both parties have united to dragoon the American workers so that the
labor costs of production (wages) would not rise, along with capitalist
profit. Truman announces that the Republican Party is the party of
economic depression, and Dewey announces that the Democratic party is
the party of inflation. Both are correct. Dewey snorts that the Truman
foreign policy is a weak and vacillating one, yet Democrat Marshall and
Republican Dulles are carrying out a bi-partisan foreign policy, which
will inevitably lead to War.

The leaders of the Republic and Democratic parties expose each other and
reveal that they are nothing but political offices boys for capitalism.

Taking advantage of the resentment against the Republican and Democratic
declarations of bankruptcy, of a large minority of the American workers
and middle class, Henry Wallace in alliance with Stalinism, has launched
a party, called the Progressive Party. This party performs a two-fold
function. It is a pressure instrument for Russian foreign policy, and a
party for small capitalists. As far back as the year 1943, Wallace
trumpeted that small business people, to him, meant employers of
five-hundred workers and up. He has continually reiterated in this
campaign that he supports free-enterprise capitalism while he advocates
nationalization of basic industries. This means he wants the capitalist
state to become the main investor in the economy while allowing room for
the wealthy middle strata of capitalists, like himself, to expand.
Wallace supports the Imperialist Marshall Plan in concealed form by
support the Stalinist foreign policy, which is in favor of a Marshall
Plan with clauses, favorable to Russia. On the other hand, he is "a
knight in shining armor," who, in the best traditions of Imperialism and
nationalism, claims he will make America "strong, free and happy." His
apparent militancy on behalf of the Negro and Jewish workers is so much
decoration \[?\] to catch votes. His program is pro-capitalist and
anti-working class.

The most comical picture of paradox are the Trotskyites and the
Socialists. They want a labor party which is at the same time militant
and anti-capitalist; bourgeois democratic and revolutionary. (They want
opportunism without opportunists.) They want a Marshall plan that is
anti-capitalist and pro-working class, all in one. They are for a
maximum of democracy for the working-class and advocate at the same time
the highest degree of totalitarianism, nationalization of basic
industries (under capitalism). Norman Thomas advocates Socialism while
he proposes to use capital to buy out the biggest capitalists. Of
course, Thomas will have to exact a promise from the capitalists not to
reinvest the capital with which he proposes to purchase their industry,
and thus continue accumulation of capital. Confiscation with
compensation on the heels of a hypothetical Trotskyite-Socialist
parliamentary victory as a substitute for the class struggle, is the
road to ruin; the road of state capitalism and bureaucracy. Norman
Thomas wants an Imperialist War which at the same time is "pro-working
class." He supported World War II and advocated the impossible, an
Imperialist war with "democratic aims."

Clearly support for any of the parties and leaders at present dominating
the American political arena is support for capitalism and wars. Instead
of a vote for the parties of war and capitalism, we advocate the
building of a working-class revolutionary party in the U.S. with the
following basic principles:

1. Our conception of the world and the society proper to it is that of
Marx's scientific socialism.

2. For the reconstitution of a revolutionary International against the
Internationals of Betrayal (Social Democracy, Stalinism, Trotskyism)

3. Against collaboration with the bourgeois and pseudo-proletarian
parties which uphold the false and deceitful banner of "true democracy."

4. The trade unions of the C.I.O., and A.F.L., Railriads \[sic\]
Brotherhoods and "Independent Unions," are part of the legal apparatus
of the Capitalist State. Working class unity will be achieved on the
basis of the platform of the party of the revolution, and, under its
leadership, within those organisms, created in the revival of the
proletarian class struggle.

5. The farm-workers are the class brothers of the Industrial proletariat
and must be won over to class-solidarity.

6. All so-called movements of colonial independence have an Imperialist
base. There does not exist for the colonial and semi-colonial areas, any
longer the problem of a bourgeois revolution. The only road is that of
proletarian revolution.

7. The proletariat must work for the defeat of its own bourgeoisie and
its satellites in the advanced industrial sectors of world capitalism,
as well as for the defeat of its own bourgeoisie and satellites in the
colonial and semi-colonial areas of world capitalism, in time of war.

8. The defeat of the bourgeoisie, on a world scale, accomplished through
the civil war of the proletariat, under the guidance and leadership of
the Revolutionary International Party, will be the beginning of the
Socialist Reorganization of Society under the Dictatorship of the
Proletariat.

9. The Dictatorship of the Proletariat, will serve as the transition to
the classless society of Socialism, where the state, as known under
capitalism, will disappear, and Government and Tyranny, will become the
history of the past.

10. The Dictatorship of the proletariat is not to be understood as a
defense of the Soviet Union. On the contrary, the dictatorship of the
proletarian will arise in Russia, which is now an Imperialist State,
through Socialist revolution.
