---
title: Korea, the Scientific Slaughterhouse
author: American Fraction of the Left Communist International
date: 1950
description: Initially published in the Autumn-Winter 1950 issue of The Internationalist, a publication of the Italian communist left in the U.S. This article was reprinted in the May 1975 issue of the Revolutionary Workers Group publication Workers' Truth. From a scanned PDF at <https://archive.org/details/rwg_workers_truth_1975-05>.
...

The war in Korea is a real war of extermination; brutal and inhuman
without any reservations. Both sides vie with one another in the
committing of crimes from which the native population suffers the
consequences.

As long as American Imperialism uses its air force to bomb
indiscriminately the villages of straw in Korea, which are consumed
completely in flames, the North Koreans proceed to round-up and execute
en-masse all suspected collaborators of MacArthur and Syngman Rhee,
besides executing captured soldiers.

The North Korean leaders gave proof of absolute indifference to the
lives of their own soldiers, who were thrown en-masse into the massacre
for limited local gains.

American Imperialism, for its part, has conducted itself worse than
German Imperialism in Europe. It is slaughtering en-masse all suspected
collaborators of the North Korean regime and established forced labor, a
la Hitler and Stalin. Forced migration is the order of the day. The
population is continually compelled to be on the move as military
operations are extended and opened up under twenty-two to twenty-four
hour notice.

The condition of the Korean population can easily be imagined; the
starvation and the catastrophe of shooting war opening up on them. As if
this is not enough, voices in the American camp babble about threatening
to use the atom bomb.

North Korea, in spite of initial success, never had the possibility of
winning nor of out-doing their earlier military offensive. Inevitably,
the powerful weight of U.S. imperialism, which also is capable of
mobilizing many other states for its aims, crushed the northerners,
whose armaments were too inferior to that of the Americans.

This means that the Korean population is tied again to a new rule of
force, for another war, War III, and other nameless horrors. But the men
of the Kremlin are indifferent to this prospect. The desperate situation
of their Korean allies and the misery of the population is of no
importance to them. Now they push China into the war as American
Imperialism threatens the water supply and electric power of Manchuria.
Thus under one pretext or another both Western and Eastern Imperialism,
in spite of their hypocritic cries for peace, are drawing the whole
world into a new conflict. The strategy of the Kremlin is to create a
weariness and contempt for rival American Imperialism and bring about an
elimination of American prestige in Asia. The price required is the
destruction of whole countries, innumerable dead, and an unheard of
misery well on its way. Thus, the Russians have pushed the North Koreans
to the initial attack, left them without sufficient armaments to bring
the war to a victorious conclusion. A victorious North Korea would have
been as detrimental to Russia as to America. Neither Imperialism can
tolerate, if it can help it, the independent victories of its "allies".
Such "independence" leads to Titoism in the case of Stalinist
imperialism, which is the contradiction between poor states and rich
states, as in the American Imperialist camp.

Like the North Koreans, the Americans in Korea commit atrocities of
their own, which is also characteristic of all war. The Cominform uses
these atrocities to good advantage in its world propaganda.

Thus the life of humanity, of entire peoples, has no other value, but
that of supplying sustenance and new excuses for the inhuman battle that
the Imperialisms instigate on the international scene.
