---
title: An Open Letter to the Comrades of the Revolutionary Workers League
author: American Fraction of the Left Communist International
date: 1937
description: Written as an appeal to the Trotskyist group the Revolutionary Workers League, who published the letter, along with a fairly standard Trotskyist response, in the October 1937 issue of their publication 'The Fourth International.' Some typos have been fixed but a scan of this issue that can be found at <https://archive.org/details/LCIvsRWL> shows that the remaining errors below were present in the original text.
...

Dear comrades:

It is almost nine years since we together broke definitely with the
counter-revolutionary wing that once led the Communist Party. Our split
was supposed to represent a Marxian reaction to the opportunist line
that brought the world proletariat from one defeat to another. Although
we broke together from the Stalinist-Bukharin line ideologically and
organizationally, we stood apart from you for the reason that
ideologically we were part of the left faction of the Italian Communist
Party which fundamental documents are to be found in the Roma thesis.
These documents were a contrast to all the political past of Cannon and
Shachtman who at that time only borrowed from the Russian opposition.
Under the leadership of Leon Trotsky the International Left Opposition
from the beginning stood for the reform of the Communist International
misjudging therefore, the fundamental reason that brought the
opportunist to the head of the C.I. That fundamental reason was
represented by the many defeats of the proletariat, upon which defeats
the counter-revolution found strength. While the opposition was swimming
in the illusion the ideological ground to dissolve itself into the
rotten second international was laid down. You will agree with us that
Trotsky did to destroy the Communist movement what Stalin was not able
to do.

While the International Bureau was splitting groups, and liquidating the
rest by sending them into the Socialist Party; from that time on they
disappeared from the proletarian horizon. On the German situation
Trotsky build up a theory that it was possible to have a proletarian
Revolution with a centrist patriotic leadership. This negative
conception of the nature of bureaucracy and opportunism, and the
anti-Lenin concept of the historical significance and necessity of a
Communist Party -- all this brought a lot of confusion into the ranks of
the Left Opposition, which consist of many sincere communists. Our
faction fought all lines of Trotsky, politically as well as
organizationally, and it cannot be otherwise because the organizational
question is bound up with the political.

We will not mention the whole history of the Left Opposition which you
all well know. We will merely call to your attention a few facts which
characterize the entire Trotsky movement and line. The Leninist method
of interpretation of the revolutionary movement of the proletariat and
the role of its historical guide is the opposite of the methods of
Trotsky ever since 1903. When we communist state that without the
historical organ the proletariat cannot be victorious, we mean exactly
what we assert. The whole post war experience and particular the Spanish
conflict shows that this Marxian concept still holds.

When you comrades split with the Workers Party in order not to join the
Socialist Party it was a healthy reaction against the line of Trotsky
and you were on the road of Marxism on the conception of the
independence of the Communist vanguard. When you broke off with Cannon
and Shachtman outfit this brought us nearer. As a fact we had a long
discussion on principle questions that concerned the proletariat
movement as a whole. We all know the results of that discussion period.
It was too mechanical and sectarian, not from the political point of
view, but the way the groups were proceeding, to be of any help toward
the establishment of a real American Left Faction of Communism, which is
a preliminary necessity to build up, in the course of the class struggle
and the revolutionary events, a real Communist Party. Anyway, we believe
that the ideas and programs could show their ability when they were
tested by events. The Spanish conflict offers the opportunity to each
and every group the test for their theories and principles and to learn
the strengths and weakness of their line; who ever lost their chance to
learn from the Spanish events, the tactics and technique of a well
developed capitalism is not a Marxists.

Our faction did not take anything from the Permanent Revolution and
analysed critically the history of the labor movement; the great work of
Lenin with a mighty experience of the October Revolution was the only
one that seen from the beginning what was the situation in Spain. Our
faction did not try to copy the historical movement that appeared from
March to October in the Russian Revolution. We cannot apply anything but
critically analyze each event. To apply to Spain what was good for the
October Revolution it means not to understand the difference of a
historical situation and the rule of the counter revolutionist that are
dealing in the proletarian front. Immediately after the Spanish
proletariat gave up their weapon (General Strike) the only weapon to
lead and destroy the capitalist state, they became victims of the
capitalist state.

When you start a insurrection either you strike hard and go forward and
establish the dictatorship of the proletariat, as the only weapon to
destroy your enemy, or else you go back. In the Spanish situation when
the proletariat instead of extending a general strike directed against
the capitalist state gives up their weapon to turn in the territorial
front that was a big blow to themselves, which can hardly be repaired on
the immediate future. It is a fact that right after the fourth and fifth
day of the general strike the capitalist class went on and on
consolidating their power. Our fraction were the only ones under the
slander and calumny of all parties and groups, and even at the cost of a
split in the organization, stood for the class line.

For our fraction the counter-revolutionary situation in Spain came right
after the proletariat gave up the general strike and not after the
anti-fascists were dis[unreadable] or when the independent army was
centralized under the Valencia government.

The fact that the anti-fascists committees as well as the independent
militia those were controlled by the same political organizations which
has shown the counter-revolutionary rule. The slogan that our fraction
gave at that time was the following: "Away from the front, turn the
imperialist war into a civil war" and all that goes with it. What is
your position comrades of the R.W.L. Now, not in July 1936.

At the meeting at Irving Plaza when your Secretary, Hugo Oehler exposed
the political line of the League, made us understand, that the official
line is purely a left tail of the Popular Front. At that meeting we
clearly saw the position of all the American groups, the Trotskyites,
the Weisbordites, the Fieldists and your position, which in our opinion,
makes an American POUM, that is from the class point of view, the
political line that comrade Oehler defended stands on the other side of
the proletariat interest. Hugo Oehler, in his speech tried to avoid
assuming any political position, but as we have expected, in the
discussion period he did take a position. First of all he did not answer
any questions that our comrades presented; he took plenty of time to
answer all the other groups although in a sarcastic manner. In answering
some other questions indirectly he gave an answer to our question and
especially when he criticized the Trotskyites for giving material aid to
Valencia Government. In this question he said the following: "We do not
support the Valencia Government, but we do not sabotage those liberals
and others that send their aid to the Valencia government." That means
he remains neutral on this vital question, although he recognizes that
this material aid is used against those who fight the reactionary
government of Valencia.

This position is just the same as the one held by the Italian Socialist
Party on the World War, "Neither support nor sabotage." This line is a
lot to the right of the centrist Balabanoff line and Zimmerwald. On the
question of insurrection also our friend Oehler made some very important
statements.

He said, we do not stand for defeatism of the loyalist army. Then do you
support the capitalist army? Or you stay in between? What is your
conception of the revolution anyway? Can the proletariat be successful
without destroying all those organs that makes the capitalist state of
which the army is the essential factor? No revolutionary phraseology, no
historical parallels will save you from a wrong position that you are
holding. Objectively your line help to keep the workers in illusions and
therefore you help the capitalist against the proletariat. If your
organization justifies itself on the basis of the Permanent Revolution
in fighting the reaction in Spain side by side with the democracy then
you make a class distinction between fascism and democracy that means
that if tomorrow Nazi Germany attacks democratic France or CechoSolaki
[sic] then the duty of the proletariat is to fight to save democracy.
That will bring us back to 1914.

Comrades, we know that all of your members of the RWL do not agree with
what Oehler and the Political Committee say on the Spanish situation. We
do not believe it. You may think that this is a matter that concerns
only the RWL but we believe that this fundamental question concerns the
proletariat in general and that you will not solve the problem through a
internal discussion. When it comes a matter that concerns the class you
must come out and fight openly just as our faction has done a year ago
when the opposition appeared.

We are writing to you this letter for the reason that we believe it is
our duty to say openly what we think of the political line of the
R.W.L., and hope that we together will be able to form an American
section of the International Fraction of Communism.

Comradely yours,

The New York Group of the Italian Section of the International Left
Fraction of Communism
