---
title: The Dilemma Is Not War or Peace But War or Revolution
author: American Fraction of the Left Communist International
date: 1950
description: Initially published in the Autumn-Winter 1950 issue of The Internationalist, a publication of the Italian communist left in the U.S. This article was reprinted in the June 1974 issue of the Revolutionary Workers Group publication Workers' Truth. From <https://archive.org/details/rwg_workers_truth_1974-06>.
...

Public opinion is preoccupied at present with a great question: When
will the next world war break out?

The possibility of a new international conflict is not denied by
anybody. Everybody is concerned about it. They understand in a situation
of this kind that the politicians who speak of a right to capture the
masses for peace, already feel their skin burnt from the effects of atom
bomb radiation. Everybody hesitates to take a position in favor of a new
war. Demagogic propositions are advanced to conjure away the coming
conflicts: disarmament, outlawing the atomic bomb, mutual appeasement,
peace movements, or strengthening the U.N.O. (United Nations
Organization). For the working class to think of opposing war by these
methods is equal to the practice of magic, but certainly not the basis
of the struggle against war.

It is clear that Russia and her allies are not fighting against war.
They simply aim to neutralize the military and economic force of their
adversaries. Only in that sense does Stalinism operate all over the
world. It is not against the use of the atomic bomb. This would then
sanctify their use of it second, in retaliation. On the other hand,
neither do they take the peace movement very seriously, the aim of which
is not the transformation of the capitalist social order, but simply to
maintain conditions as they exist at present.

The genuine Marxists must not pose the problem in the questions: Will
there be a New World War? To the genuine Marxists, the conflict is
inevitable as long as capitalist society exists. They, the Marxists, are
the unique workers for peace through the struggle for the overthrow of
the bourgeoisie and the proletarian revolution. They reject, therefore,
the hypocritical and false pacifist crusade, denounce it and refuse to
join with it in any manner whatsoever. The claim that it is possible to
secure peace or conjure away war is the refuge of all "the men of good
will" and therefore also, of the bourgeoisie. Such a claim is treason to
and proof of the abandonment of the interests of the working class.

The work of political clarification that qualities as revolutionary must
be based on the following:

1. It must anticipate the end of the period in which the workers are
forced to fight for this or that imperialist antagonist. It must assert
in a most explicit manner that the working class will not fight for any
of these, and refuse in every case to yield to the deceit and trickery
of Imperialist war.

2. They do not support any victor, but profit from the crisis of the
world bourgeoisie in order to prepare and lead to the revolutionary
struggle. The proletariat recognizes the two adversaries only as their
class enemies and in both cases, there is only one kind of politics to
follow behind either fronts: revolutionary defeatism.

3. In face of the attempt to line up the masses physically and
spiritually for the war, the Marxists call upon them to refuse to shed
their blood a for the cause of any Imperialism whatsoever, and to work
instead not for the bloody victory of this or that brigand, but for the
victory of the revolutionary proletariat.

There is no greater task for the real revolutionary than to make clear
to the workers that they have nothing to defend in capitalist society,
and that they should not seek to support this or that Imperialism that
permits a more easy life. To the proletariat, whoever gives support to
the war betrays their cause. The proletariat has no interest in
defending anybody in this conflict, or any other Imperialist
conflagration. It has only one interest: to conquer the peace by the
only possible method: Revolution!
