---
title: "Beasts of Burden: Capitalism, Animals, Communism"
author: Antagonism and Practical History
date: 1999
description: Written by Antagonism and Practical History. Taken from <https://libcom.org/library/beasts-burden-antagonism-practical-history>, with the original version also available at Antagonism's website at <https://www.oocities.org/capitolhill/lobby/3909/beasts/index.html>.
...

This is a text which, we hope, faces in two directions. On the one hand
we hope that it will be read by people interested in animal liberation
who want to consider why animal exploitation exists, as well as how. On
the other hand, by those who define themselves as anarchists or
communists who either dismiss animal liberation altogether or personally
sympathise with it but don't see how it relates to their broader
political stance.

While there have always been groups and individuals with feet in both
camps, for the most part discussion between those involved in animal
liberation and communists has been at a derisory level. "Debate," in so
far as it exists, consists mainly of abuse and rarely moves beyond the
level of comments like "wasn't Hitler a vegetarian" (actually not -- he
injected "bulls blood" into his testicles, and does this mean you can't
be a communist and a house painter or an Austrian?).

We hope to prompt the beginnings of a real debate about the relationship
between the "animal question" and the "social question". This text does
not claim to have all the answers or to be the "communist manifesto" for
animals, but we think that it does pose some of the key questions. Over
to you...

## 1. Capitalism and class society

All life on planet earth is becoming increasingly enmeshed in a global
economy based on money, profit and exchange -- capitalism. Virtually
everything has a price on it -- food, drink, the soil, homes, plants,
animals, the labour of humans. Needs and desires count for nothing --
those who cannot afford to pay the price have to do without even if the
consequence is death.

For the majority of human beings the consequence is a life dominated by
work, half-lived in schools, factories, offices and prisons. For many
this is compounded by the effects of poverty, war and various forms of
oppression. But humans are not the only creatures caught up in this net.
Animals of all kinds are subject to the industrial application of
suffering and death in the wild, in factory farms and laboratories.

It is obvious that the experiences of humans and animals are linked,
having a common origin in the same system of production and exchange.
But we want to go further and assert that the development and
maintenance of capitalism as a system that exploits humans is in some
ways dependent upon the abuse of animals. Furthermore the movement that
abolishes capitalism by changing the relations between humans --
communism -- also involves a fundamental transformation of the relations
between humans and animals.

### 1.1 Animals and primitive communism

When we talk of the relationship between humans and animals, it is
important not to lose sight of the fact that humans are animals too. As
we trace back our origins as humans, our ancestry merges with those of
other primates. Hominids emerged about 25 million years ago, from which
evolved various species of apes including, about 250,000 years ago, homo
sapiens. Dental and other evidence suggests that like most modern
species of apes, these hominids were primarily vegetarian. Humans do not
have the sharp teeth, retractable claws or digestive systems common to
carnivores. Although early humans, like other hominids may have
sometimes scavenged meat killed by other animals, diet was probably
based almost entirely on plant foods.

The hunting of larger animals for food, with the increased importance of
meat in the diet, may have become more significant when humans
encountered colder conditions in which plant foods were harder to come
by, particularly in the last Ice Age. Large scale hunting brought with
it a more rigid sexual division of labour, as the mobility required
effectively excluded women who were pregnant or nursing young children.

Hunting also saw the earliest traces of the transformation of free human
activity into something resembling work. This is partly because hunting
requires more effort: "On average 240 calories of plant food can be
gathered in one hour, whereas, taking into account the high failure rate
of hunting, it has been estimated that one hour of hunting produces only
100 calories of food" (Ehrenberg). More importantly foraging could be
undertaken by the whole community and fully integrated with other social
activities such as singing, chatting and childcare. Hunting on the other
hand depended on stealth and silence, and tended to become the
specialised task of able-bodied males.

Even once hunting had become established, It is certainly not the case
that all early humans ate meat all of the time. The popular image of
bloodthirsty primitives slaughtering their way through the animal
kingdom is nonsense. The notion of "Man the Hunter" whose "principal
food is meat, and his principal occupation hunting" has been criticised
as "largely a reflection of the interests and preconceptions of
nineteenth-century Western male anthropologists and of the status of
hunting as an upper class pastime in nineteenth century Europe"
(Ehrenberg).

So-called "hunter gatherer" societies should perhaps be called forager
societies as the gathering of plants, nuts and grains was in most cases
far more fundamental than hunting, and accounted for a higher proportion
of the regular diet. In most modern foraging societies, plant foods
gathered primarily by women account for 60-70 per cent of diet
(Ehrenberg). Different communities across the world would have had
different ideas about animals, and different ways of treating them, but
we can deduce something about their beliefs and practices from cultural
artefacts left behind (e.g. cave paintings), and from similar
communities that have existed until recently.

For most of the time humans have existed, they "lived in relatively
autonomous and scattered groups, in families (in the broadest sense: the
family grouping all those of the same blood), in tribes". Their way of
life was essentially communistic. There was no buying and selling, no
wage labour, no state and no private property: "Goods were not produced
to be consumed after exchange, after being placed on a market... The
community distributed what it produced according to simple rules, and
everyone directly got what it gave him... Activities were decided
(actually imposed on the group by necessity) and achieved in common, and
their results were shared in common" (Dauv√© and Martin).

In these societies, the relationship between humans and the rest of the
natural world was completely different to the modern one. The most
significant fact about animals in so-called "primitive communism" is
that they do not belong to anybody. There is no private ownership of
land, trees, or animals, and no domestication. While some animals may be
hunted, all animals run wild and free. People only take what they need
from nature, and where animals are hunted it is on a limited basis. In
any event there would be no point in indiscriminate mass killing of
animals, as the community would have no means of using or storing the
surplus, and no market on which to sell the surplus. Communities
typically live in a harmonious relationship with their environment; it
is their home and their provider and it is not in their interest to
destroy it, by for instance, exterminating animal species.

Animals are not viewed as commodities, but are regarded with a mixture
of awe, wonder, respect and fear. Instead of being seen as subordinate
species, they are seen as separate beings sharing the world with humans.
Often communities adopt a particular animal as their "totem"; animals
may be regarded as ancestors or protectors of the tribe, and may even be
worshipped.

### 1.2 Domestication and domination

The relations between humans and other animals, and between humans
themselves, were radically transformed by the development of
agriculture. Agriculture instituted a new relationship with the natural
world: "The land itself becomes an instrument of production and the
planet's species its objects" (Zerzan). Domestication, marked by the
cultivation of plants and the constriction of animals to a particular
place, was a key turning point in the gradual replacement of nomadic
lifestyles with the sedentary systems of states, classes, cities, work
and private property. In this sense, Zerzan argues, "in domesticating
animals and plants man necessarily domesticates himself".

We should avoid ascribing to agriculture the role of "original sin", the
singular cause of humanity's misfortunes and of our expulsion from some
primitive communist Eden. The development of states and classes were
contradictory, complex and contested processes taking place over many
millennia. While the domestication of plants and animals was an
important part of this story, we do not want to suggest that it was the
whole story.

Indeed some archaeologists suggest that it was the emergence of social
elites that gave birth to agriculture rather than the other way round.
According to Hodder (1990) "The possibility exists that domestication in
the social and symbolic sense occurred prior to domestication in the
economic sense". Whereas foraging offers immediate access to food (when
it is available), there is a "delayed return for agricultural labour
investment"; crops have to be planted, animals fed and raised before
food is available. Thus, "The adoption of more intensive production
techniques, leading to agriculture, served the interests of dominant
groups in society in that the new economic regime ensnared people within
social and economic structures on which they came to depend". It is in
this sense that "The domestication of wild cattle and of the external
wild more generally is a metaphor and mechanism for the control of
society".

Some form of agriculture existed for thousands of years without
particularly radical social change. The transition from foraging to
farming is believed to have begun in the so-called Fertile Crescent (now
covered by Iraq, Iran, Turkey, Syria, Israel and Jordan) around 10,000
BC and to have become well-established in this area by 6000 BC. However,
only small numbers of animals were kept, with most meat still being
obtained from hunting. The main focus of farming was on growing crops
using simple technology, rather than the plough; archaeologists
sometimes refer to this as horticulture rather than agriculture as such.

The real changes took place in the later Neolithic (from around 3000 BC)
with the development of intensive agriculture. Animals began to be used
for milk and wool products as well as for meat, and to pull the newly
invented ploughs and carts. For the first time, humans began to keep
large herds and flocks of animals. Systematically separated from the
wild and later selectively bred, these domesticated animals gradually
became physically distinct from their wild cousins.

The social impact of this was enormous. Out of the practice of "animal
husbandry", Camatte argues, "grew both the notion of private property
and exchange value" and "the rise of patriarchy". The amount of labour
required in society increased dramatically with a whole range of new
tasks: clearing forests for grazing land, feeding and tendering animals,
milking, processing milk products, spinning and weaving wool, and so on:
"farming and food production... changed from a comparatively small
series of tasks which one woman, or group of women, could have performed
with comparatively little equipment, to a series of complex operations
which would have been a full-time occupation for the whole population"
(Ehrenberg).

Gender relations were transformed. The demand for labour required women
to have more children (in foraging societies childbirth tends to be
spaced by three or four years). The intensification of women's work in
reproducing labour excluded them from other tasks. As the importance of
hunting declined, men increasingly took over the farming tasks
previously undertaken by women. Women's social position declined as
"they no longer contributed so much to the daily production of food,
which had been a crucial factor in maintaining the equal status they had
previously enjoyed" (Ehrenberg).

It has also been suggested that it was "the management of herds of
domestic animals which first gave rise to an interventionist and
manipulative conception of political life... Domestication thus became
the archetypal pattern for other kinds of social subordination. The
model was a paternal one, with the ruler a good shepherd, like the
bishop with his pastoral staff. Loyal, docile animals obeying a
considerate master were an example to all employees" (Thomas).

### 1.3 Animals as wealth

After domestication animals, or at least some species, no longer ran
free. Now they could belong to somebody: Adam Smith noted that along
with crops, herds of animals were the earliest form of private property
(Thomas). This property was not just used to produce food and clothing;
it was also a form of wealth. From the earliest stages of domestication
"Meat consumption was the conspicuous display of dominant ruling power.
The more cattle slaughtered, cooked and eaten, the greater the man"
(Spencer).

Domesticated animals were a fundamental form of wealth "which could be
accumulated and handed on from one generation to the next.... as one
family accumulated more cattle, or acquired better ploughs the gap
between their wealth and that of their neighbours would increase
progressively... A distinction between rich and poor, which is
insignificant in forager societies, develops" (Ehrenberg).

As well as being maintained as an embodiment of wealth, animals not
needed for immediate consumption could be traded with other property
owners and even be used as money. In this early stage of the market, as
Marx observed in Capital, "The money-form comes to be attached... to the
object of utility which forms the chief element of indigenous alienable
wealth, for example cattle".

As animals became the property of groups or individuals they could be
not only bought and sold, but stolen and fought over. While the
development of hunting required the organisation of part of the
community as a killing machine, the transformation of this into a war
machine to systematically kill other humans may have arisen "when for
the first time people owned a resource which it was both worthwhile and
fairly easy to steal" (Ehrenberg).

### 1.4 Slavery

Many of those put to work in early civilisation were slaves. Once it is
taken for granted that animals are mere objects provided for the use of
humans the introduction of slavery simply involves assigning to certain
groups of humans the status of animals. As Marx notes "under slavery,
according to the striking expression employed in antiquity, the worker
is distinguishable only as instrumentum vocale [speaking implement] from
an animal, which is instrumentum semi-vocale [semi-mute implement], and
from a lifeless implement, which is instrumentum mutum [mute
instrument]" (Marx, 1867).

In the modern period, racist ideology defined black people as more
animal than human, legitimising slavery. Slaves were treated as animals,
having to endure "terrible conditions under transportation, the removal
of children and the separation of families, branding with hot irons, the
wearing of collars and chains and even medical experimentation". Slaves
were sold at markets modelled on livestock markets, with one
contemporary noting that slaves were handled at markets "as we handle
beasts", tested for their fitness and strength and so on. Unruly slaves
were sent to "nigger breakers" to be crushed in the same way that "horse
breakers" were used to domesticate wild horses. "These techniques were
not new, they had been developed over the last few centuries on farms,
in livestock markets, in abattoirs and... laboratories". (Meat and dairy
produce: symbols of male power, sexual dominance and racial
discrimination, 1997).

Similarly, "Animal domestication furnished many of the techniques for
dealing with delinquency: bridles for scolding women; cages, chains and
straw for madmen" (Thomas). We could probably add prisons to this list
too, and more recently the use of cattle prods in torture.

### 1.5 Cows, boys and Indians: Primitive accumulation and animals

The animal industry, in particular cattle and sheep farming, has been
central to the spread of capitalist social relations throughout the
world. Marx argued that for capitalism to develop, there has to be a
process of brutal dispossession which he called "primitive
accumulation... the historical process of divorcing the producer from
the means of production". Capitalism requires that all the means of
production (including the land) belong to capital, and that the majority
of the population are reduced to proletarians -- people who can only
survive by selling their labour in return for a wage.

In pre-capitalist societies, these conditions do not exist. The land
either belongs to nobody or it is divided up into small plots, with most
people having their own plot of land which they either own or can use,
and/or access to common land. People who can grow their own food have no
need to earn money to buy food, and given the choice most would not take
a job in a factory. For this to change, peasants have to be forcibly
deprived of land through "conquest, enslavement, robbery [and] murder"
-- "this history, the history of their expropriation, is written in the
annals of mankind in blood and fire" (Marx, 1867).

The historical evidence suggests that not only is capitalism dependent
on ruthless primitive accumulation, but primitive accumulation relies
upon the animal industry. In England, the process of "forcibly driving
the peasantry from the land" and enclosing common land started as early
as the late 15th century. But what was it that motivated the nobility to
undertake this? Marx is clear that it was "the rise in the price of the
wool", which made it profitable to transform "arable land into sheep
walks". People were driven from their homes to make way for sheep,
leading Thomas More to write at the time of a curious land where
"sheep... swallow down the very men themselves".

This process was accompanied by the clearance of forest, particularly in
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. In this period, "An ideology
of meat-eating (ennobling the heart, enriching the blood, encouraging
the soldiers) played its part in the formation of the eighteenth century
person... The growth of London meat consumption has been linked to the
development of scientific breeding practices, the extension of turnpikes
and highways, the draining of marshes, the cutting down of forests"
(Linebaugh). As well as opening up grazing land for animals, this was
also aimed at clamping down on the forest-dwellers, many of them
squatters living "free from the normal social constraints of church and
manor courts" (Thomas).

The Highlands of Scotland were virtually emptied of people in the
nineteenth century, as the inhabitants were forcibly removed to make way
for sheep, and later deer as the Highlands were turned into a hunting
resort for the rich. The Highland Clearances were resisted, but
evictions were enforced by the military.

The genocidal colonisation of the Americas also featured the replacement
of indigenous people with profitable animals, starting with Columbus who
brought the first cattle and horses to the "New World" in 1494.
Hollywood's myth of the epic struggle between cowboys and Indians might
not be historically accurate, but it does express a basic truth. The
dynamic for the dispossession and extermination of native peoples was
often the wish to replace them with cattle.

Ironically some of the victims of earlier dispossession helped in this
process. For instance in Patagonia, Araucanian Indians were rounded up
and slaughtered in the 1870s, making way for cattle grazing. Some Scots
helped in this slaughter, "exiled in the Highland Clearances, torn
cruelly from their homeland and tossed on to the high seas, they fetched
up in the Falklands, then took part in another brutal clearance at the
other end of the world" (Wangford).

Cattle grazing was not the only aspect of the animal industry important
to colonisation. In north America in particular the fur trade was
important, as shown by the crucial role of the Hudson Bay Company.
According to Fredy Perlman, in the late 18th century "Fur is Europe's
oil. The French Empire in America revolves around fur. The nascent
Russian Empire in Siberia is a fur trappers empire".

Primitive accumulation was not driven by a historically inevitable
manifest destiny. There had to be an immediate economic incentive to
dispossess those living on the land, and this was provided by the
profits to be made from animals. In this sense the animal industry was
the starting motor of primitive accumulation, without which the
subsequent gains for the ruling class (the creation of a proletariat,
access to mineral wealth etc.) may not have been realised.

### 1.6 Animals and the origin of the factory system

Capitalism tries to squeeze the last drop of life out of human beings,
intensifying the work process to eliminate all non-productive movements.
It seeks the "eradication of any uncontrolled movement of the hand, any
unproductive glance of the eyes, any unwanted wandering of the mind"
(Collectivities). Similarly with animals, the aim is to eliminate
everything that does not contribute to the final product, to turn them
into machines for the conversion of feed into meat or other commodities.

With animals as with humans, the factory system aims to restrict the
movement of the body to maximise profits. Factory farming was already
established by Roman times; Plutarch writes that "it is a common
practice to stitch up the eyes of cranes and swans and shut them up in
dark places to fatten". In seventeenth century England pigs, poultry and
lambs were fattened by being confined indoors in darkness; "Geese were
thought to put on weight if the webs of their feet were nailed to the
floor" (Thomas). Then as now, the movement of animals was restricted
because it burned up calories and therefore slowed down weight gain.

The same basic techniques are still in use in modern factory farming,
with the addition of new methods of confinement such as individual cages
for chickens and piglets. It seems highly likely that the development of
the factory for humans in the modern period was influenced by this long
history of factory farming. The aim of the factory system was to
concentrate human bodies in one place to increase control over their
movements. The main difference from factory farms is that humans are
only confined for part of the day; capitalism needs their bodies to last
longer in order to maximise the labour it can extract from them. With
animals, the aim is to fatten them for slaughter in the minimum time --
broiler chickens, with a natural lifespan of seven years, are killed
when they are seven weeks old.

The origins of assembly line production are to be found in the US beef
packing yards of the late 19th century: "The packing houses were the
first American industry to create assembly lines, unable to cope with
the constant stream of cattle coming in every day the packinghouse
giants hit on a way of streamlining the slaughter process -- they
invented the conveyor belt" (Rifkin).

A 1942 publication, financed by a meat-packing company, says: "The
slaughtered animals, suspended head downwards from a moving chain, or
conveyor, pass from worker to worker, each of whom performs some
particular step in the process. So efficient has this procedure proved
to be that it has been adopted by many other industries, as for example
in the assembling of automobiles". Henry Ford acknowledged that the idea
for the automobile assembly line "came in a general way from the
overhead trolley that the Chicago packers used in dressing beef"
(Adams).

As Carol Adams observes it is appropriate that the slaughterhouse has
been used "as trope for treatment of the worker in a modern capitalist
society" in works like Upton Sinclair's "the Jungle" and Bertolt
Brecht's "Saint Joan of the Stockyards". Aside from the historic link,
both the animal and the assembly line worker are treated as "an inert,
unthinking object, whose creative, bodily, emotional needs are ignored",
while the dismemberment of the animal's body is echoed by the
"fragmentation of the individual's work" on the assembly line (Adams).

### 1.7 Good Breeding: the genetic intensification of production

Jacques Camatte has talked of the anthropomorphization of capital,
whereby capital raises human beings in its own image: "Capital becomes
autonomous by domesticating the human being. After
analysing-dissecting-fragmenting the human being, capital reconstructs
the human being as a function of its process". With humans, this process
is accomplished not just by ideology but by subjecting the body to a
range of disciplinary regimes: the school, the prison, the factory.

With animals things have gone a stage further with a modification of the
physical bodies of animals to make them more productive. There is a long
history of selective breeding of animals in this way, described by John
Zerzan: "the domesticating of animals... defies natural selection and
re-establishes the controllable organic world at a debased artificial
level... Transmuted from a state of freedom to that of helpless
parasites, these animals become completely dependent on man for
survival. In domestic mammals as a rule, the size of the brain becomes
relatively smaller as specimens are produced that devote more energy to
growth and less to activity. Placid, infantilized, typified perhaps by
the sheep, most domesticated of herd mammals; the remarkable
intelligence of wild sheep is completely lost in their tamed
counterparts. The social relationships among domestic animals are
reduced to the crudest essentials. Non-reproductive parts of the life
cycle are minimised, courtship is curtailed, and the animal's very
capacity to recognise its own species is impaired".

The twentieth century has seen a number of attempts to apply animal
breeding techniques to humans, as promoted by the eugenics movement.
Forced sterilisation and other efforts have been applied to stop the
"unfit" and disabled from breeding. While this was applied with the most
ruthless determination in Nazi Germany, eugenics programmes have also
been implemented in social democratic Sweden and elsewhere. In Britain,
eugenics may not have been systematically applied but its ideas were
very influential amongst sections of the ruling class earlier this
century and influenced various state policies. For instance, birth
control pioneers like Marie Stopes were partially motivated by such
concerns.

Selective breeding of animals is now being refined through the
development of a range of genetic/bio-technological methods. Animal
species are being genetically manipulated to develop xenotransplantation
(cross species organ transplants), pharming (the production of drugs and
other products from genetically-mutated animals) and increased food
productivity. Examples of the latter include attempts to develop
chickens without feathers and animals whose immune systems attack their
own fat cells to produce leaner meat.

In a further move in the commodification of life, the European
Parliament has recently voted to allow the patenting of
genetically-mutated animals and plants. Biotechnology companies can now
claim that a mutated animal they have "invented" is their exclusive
private property.

Camatte anticipates that one possible long-term development of
capitalism could be the "mutation of the human being, or rather a change
of the species: production of a perfectly programmable being which has
lost all the characteristics of the species Homo Sapiens". The Critical
Arts Ensemble suggest that this has already begun as "Individuals of
various social groups and classes are forced to submit their bodies for
reconfiguration so that they can function more efficiently under the
obsessively rational imperatives of pancapitalism (production,
consumption, and order)". In the immediate future the main mechanisms
will be "the blending of the organic and the electromechanical", new
eugenics (linked to genetic screening) and mood-controlling drugs. Human
clones, cyborgs and replicants are the stuff of science fiction, but the
technologies are being developed with animals which could be used in an
attempt to modify human bodies at a future stage of class society.

### 1.8 Extermination

As with humans, those animals that cannot profitably be integrated into
the productive process are simply discarded. Domestication has focused
on a narrow number of species; others not entirely domesticated have
been preserved for recreational slaughter -- such as deer. But many
other species have been exterminated altogether, threatening the
biodiversity of the planet. In "colonial India and Africa, the flower of
British manhood indulged in veritable orgies of big game slaughter". In
north America, the wolf "became the symbol of untamed nature" and was
exterminated in most areas, as earlier in Europe, while between 1850 and
1880, 75 million buffalo were killed by hunters (Thomas). In each case,
mass slaughter was seen as part of the divinely sanctioned
transformation of wilderness into civilisation.

The same mania of extermination fuelled the hunting of humans defined as
animals, such as the Aboriginal peoples of Australia, or the indigenous
population of the Philippines, the subject of "goo-goo hunts" after the
US conquest of 1898.

Many other animal species have disappeared because of the destruction
and fragmentation of their habitat. The animal industry is often
directly involved in the wrecking of fragile local ecosystems,
particularly when forests are cleared to make way for grazing land.

Today we are used to seeing the last survivors of endangered species
conserved in zoos. The origin of these zoos formed part of the same
colonial mentality that exterminated so many creatures: "the spectacle
of the zoo animal must be understood historically as a spectacle of
colonial or imperial power" (Baker) with the captive animals serving as
"simultaneous emblems of human mastery over the natural world and of
English dominion over remote territories" (Ritvo).

### 1.9 Vivisection

Vivisection has been part of scientific practice since the late 17th
century. Today experiments on animals are carried out on a vast scale
by, among others, private corporations, academic institutions and the
military. Nobody seriously denies that this causes suffering to animals,
but the counter claim is made that this contributes to meeting human
needs.

To argue over whether a particular experiment, or class of experiments,
is potentially beneficial is to miss the point: capitalist progress, of
which vivisection is a part, is a fraud. Put simply it is a myth that
science at the service of capital will deliver a never ending series of
products which will make our lives easier, healthier, longer.

On the contrary, the intensification of the abuse of animals often
contributes directly to improving the techniques of domination of human
beings. In some cases this is self-evident. The classic example is
military research. In the UK, the use of animals in experiments at the
Defence Evaluation and Research Agency (DERA) at Porton Down in
Wiltshire increased steadily in the 1990s, with tests including shooting
pigs and monkeys and a range of biological warfare experiments.

It may be true that some new drugs could benefit some individuals in
spite of being tested on animals. But there are plenty of
well-established cures that the majority of the world's population are
denied access to because of their poverty. The same drugs companies
which claim to be crusading for human health would rather let people die
than allow their patented products to be made available on a non-profit
basis. Research into new drugs is aimed at increasing profits not
solving medical problems.

In any case improving human health is not just a matter of plentiful
pills; the most efficient way to help people is to provide clean water,
sanitation, food and basic medical care to those currently lacking. The
very industrial process which holds out the promise of new life
enhancing commodities actually manufactures ill health. New drugs don't
just mean abused animals; they can also mean more factories polluting
the air and water with chemicals, more people working longer hours and
suffering stress, depression, repetitive strain and the other diseases
of civilisation.

The answer to the question "why does capitalism experiment on animals?"
is "because they can't get away with doing it to humans". But there are
exceptions -- since Porton Down was set up in 1916, tests have also been
carried out on more than 12,000 humans, chiefly military "volunteers"
duped into taking part for a few perks without being properly informed
of the consequences. Substances tested have included nerve gas, mustard
gas, anthrax and LSD. Hundreds of ex-servicemen claim that they are
suffering from disabilities including skins and eye disorder, kidney and
liver complaints and depression as a result. It has only recently been
revealed that in the 1950s tests of the nerve gas Sarin killed a 20 year
old conscript, Ronald Madison (Guardian, 20.8.99).

### 1.10 Commodity fetishism and meat

In 1998 two pigs escaped from a slaughterhouse in Wiltshire, swam across
the River Avon and ran off into the surrounding countryside. On the run
for a week, the "Tamworth Two" became the focus of an intense media
circus; when recaptured they were spared the slaughterhouse, a newspaper
bought the pigs off the owner and found them a safe home. The
contradiction between the sentimentalisation of these particular pigs
and the simultaneous mass consumption of other pigs can only be
explained with reference to Marx's theory of commodity fetishism.

Commodity fetishism is the process whereby commodities are imbued with a
life of their own with their origins as the product of labour concealed.
It is particularly well-developed in relation to animal products, whose
origins are systematically disavowed by supermarket packaging and
linguistic distancing (pork not pig, beef not cow). This in turn creates
a space for the circulation of a range of semi-magical symbolic meanings
around these animal commodities. Meat is seen not as the product of
factory farm and slaughterhouse, but as a token of masculinity ("real
men eat meat") or as a national totem. So in France steak "follows the
index of patriotic values: it helps them to rise in wartime, it is the
very flesh of the French soldier" (Barthes) while across the channel
nothing is quite "as British as roast beef".

Recently this fetishism has been partially fractured by disclosures
about the animal production process resulting from health scares. In
France, blood and offal from animal carcasses, sewage and untreated
water were revealed to have been used in making poultry and pig feed; in
Belgium dioxin contamination was found in poultry. In Britain there was
the BSE epidemic in cows (and in some humans) linked to the practice of
feeding cows with protein pellets made from the remains of chicken, as
well as outbreaks of E. Coli food poisoning from contaminated meat.

The health impact is not confined to those who eat meat. Even the
British government's advisory committee on the microbiological safety of
food recently warned of the "calamitous consequences" of the overuse of
antibiotics in farming (Guardian, 19.8.99). The use of drugs to speed
growth and their routine prescription for whole herds or flocks to
prevent disease is leading to the development of micro-organisms
resistant to antibiotics.

Are these problems of capitalism or of meat production per se? Clearly
the thirst for profit is a major factor and specific practices could be
reformed, and indeed are being reformed. But meat production on anything
like the current scale would be impossible without intensive farming.
There is a limit to how far it could ever be possible to sanitise an
industrial process involving slaughter, blood and the eating of flesh.

If meat eating answers a human need, it is a need that many human
cultures and an increasing number of individuals do not feel. It is
certainly a need for the huge food corporations who depend on it. In
modern capitalism it is a need, like smoking, that has to be continually
reinforced by marketing, regardless of its effect on people, animals and
the environment.

### 1.11 Hunting and class power

In the ancient slave states, hunting "became increasingly an opportunity
for the ruling elite to publicise its dominance over lesser beings"
(Serpell). In the Roman Circuses, Emperors would oversee and participate
in the mass slaughter of captured wild animals including lions,
elephants, bears and crocodiles. Archers paid for the privilege of
shooting animals from ringside seats. Gladiators killing each other, or
heretics being tortured, were also part of the entertainment.

Hunting has performed a similar function as a display of ruling class
power in modern Britain. For much of the 18th century, fox hunting was
"the casual and disorganised pursuit of backwoods squires and farmers".
The development of regular hunts with their own territories in the late
eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries came about as fox hunting
became the favoured leisure pursuit of the great landowners. As well as
a means of socialisation for upper class males, fox hunting "reaffirmed
their prominence in the local community" (Colley).

Interestingly in view of the hunting lobby's claim to defend the rural
way of life this process saw the further subordination of the
countryside to the interests of the wealthy: "The very scenery of Great
Britain was now reorganised and re-envisioned in keeping with the
leisure priorities of men of land and substance. Hedges were torn down,
ditches filled, gates and bridges built, tenants" privacy invaded, all
in pursuit of the unfortunate, uneatable fox" (Colley).

In the twentieth century hunting has provided a means for the social
integration of the non-aristocratic rich into more traditional wealthy
circles, and it remains primarily a pursuit of the rich and powerful
from the royal family down.

Despite this, abolishing hunting would no longer threaten the interests
of the ruling class as a whole. Capital is becoming more impersonal and
is not dependent on the kind of socialisation offered by hunting to
create a coherent dominant class. In fact it is barely dependent on
individual rich people at all -- the top 200 wealthiest families could
be wiped out without affecting the reproduction of capitalism one iota.
As a display of ruling class power, hunting is a minor footnote compared
with the modern spectacle of high-tech televised warfare. In this
context, hunting can now be treated as a moral issue and opposed even by
parts of the ruling class. At the time of writing, the prospect of some
hunting being banned in the UK is becoming more likely.

Such moves will meet with resistance from rural-based sections of the
ruling class and their supporters. The movement to defend hunting
demonstrates all too clearly how the right to kill foxes is tied up with
a wider agenda of defending the interests of landowners (opposition to
rambling etc.). With its threat to unleash a violent petit-bourgeois
small farmers' backlash under aristocratic patronage, the pro-hunting
Countryside Alliance resembles a classic fascist movement in the making
(albeit one with no chance of taking power), especially as in its right
wing populist take on rural life "The Countryside is seen as a place of
all things traditionally British... white, cultured, patriotic,
heterosexual, family centred, beef eating, conservative" (Animal
magazine).

### 1.12 Working class violence -- against animals

In addition to the corporate abuse of animals, there is a more diffuse
field of cruelty, exploitation and extermination. Partly this is driven
by economic imperatives -- if the choice is between extreme poverty on
the one hand or poaching an elephant to sell its tusks on the other, it
is hardly surprising that animal welfare is low on many people's
priorities. But there is also an element of the powerless venting their
frustration on those they have power over -- animals or children. Marx
notes that the slave treated as a beast of burden or a tool "gives
himself the satisfaction of knowing that he is different by treating the
one with brutality and damaging the other" (Marx, 1867).

The internalisation of relations of domination partially explains why
some working class men take pleasure in killing animals. Even fox
hunting, while organised by and for the rich, relies on the paid and
unpaid participation of terrier men and a cross-class mix of hunt
followers. This was evident on the mass rally in favour of hunting in
London's Hyde Park (1997). The presentation of this as some kind of
spontaneous cross-class rural revolt disguised what it actually
demonstrated: the semi-feudal relations of patronage that still exist in
the rural economy. Yet while many were paid or pressured to take part,
it is undeniable that faced with some of the lowest wages and longest
working hours in the country, a section of the rural working class is
prepared to line up with its bosses to defend their miserable situation.
We are reminded of Louise Michel's insight that "The more ferocious a
man is toward animals, the more that man cringes before the people who
dominate them".

### 1.13 Beyond humanism

Human domination of animals has been justified by Christianity and
humanism, both of which posed the human being at the centre of creation,
the king of the beasts, in nature but not of it. The boundary between
humans and animals was absolute and rigidly policed. Before the
widespread advent of pet keeping, any intimacy with animals was suspect:
"in at least half of the well-documented witchcraft cases which were
brought to trial in England, the accused was implicated by the fact that
he or she possessed and displayed affection for one or more animal
companions" (Serpell).

The construction of "man" in this image has involved the denial and
repression of human needs and desires. Thus whole categories of human
life, such as sex, dancing and nakedness have been denounced by
moralists throughout history as "bestial". Women who step out of line
can be referred to as dogs, bitches, shrews, vixens or cows (Arkangel).

The Italian socialist (and apologist for domestication) Antonio Gramsci
wrote approvingly that "The history of industrialism has always been a
continuing struggle ... against the element of 'animality' in man. It
has been an uninterrupted, often painful and bloody process of
subjugating natural (i.e. animal and primitive) instincts to a new, more
complex and rigid norms and habits of order, exactitude and precision
which can make possible the increasingly complex forms of collective
life which are the necessary consequence of industrial development"
(Prison Notebooks).

In cultures less penetrated by the values of capital, this animality is
something to be admired rather than degraded. Thus an elder of the Dogon
people in Mali once said: "Animals are superior to men because they
belong to the bush and don't have to work. Many animals feed themselves
on what man grows by painful toil" (Horniman).

In fact wildlife does provide an implicit critique of human society, as
an inspiration, and contrast with "domesticated" society. Despite
attempts to portray all animal social life as amounting to a permanent
war for survival, anyone with cats or dogs knows that much of their
lives are spent playing and lazing around.

As Fredy Perlman shows animal activity is the opposite of alienated
labour, much like human activity in "primitive communist" societies: "A
time and motion engineer watching a bear near a berry patch would not
know when to punch the clock... the bear makes no distinction between
work and play. If the engineer has an imagination he might say that the
bear experiences joy from the moment the berries turn deep red and that
none of the bear's motions are work".

"Wild" remains an insult passed on the free (or those who would be
free), just as rioters continue to be denounced as animals and militant
workers as wildcat strikers. But the flipside of this is that the idea
of wildness as liberation will always have a hold on the imagination of
rebels and insurgents ("rise like lions after slumber, in unvanquishable
number" -- Shelley). If, according to Martin Luther in 1530 and Pope Leo
XIII in 1891, possession of private property is an essential difference
between man and beast (Thomas), then we should be happy to shake off our
"human nature".

### 1.14 Capitalism and animals today

In previous stages of class society, animals were the main form of
wealth and sometimes of exchange. Capitalism's subsequent development
was dependent on primitive accumulation, and in many parts of the world
it was the rewards of the economic exploitation of animals that provided
the incentive to clear people from the land. In early capitalism,
animals still provided the main means of transport and were absolutely
central to the economy.

Today capital has diversified and the animal industry is one among many.
Some would no doubt argue that capital has no imperative to exploit
animals, and that a consistently "cruelty free" capitalism is a
possibility. Indeed this view seems to be shared both by pro-capitalist
advocates of market forces liberating animals (through consumer
boycotts), and by anarchists and communists for whom this is "proof"
that opposition to animal exploitation offers no threat to capitalism.
Of course it is possible to imagine a theoretical model of capitalism
that does not depend on animals, but this is to confuse an abstraction
with the actually existing capitalism that has emerged as a result of
real historical processes. Similarly we could imagine a capitalism
without racism or women's oppression, yet both of these have played a
crucial role in maintaining capital's domination and continue to exist
despite superficial changes to the contrary.

It would be a mistake to think that the exploitation of animals is now
only of marginal concern to capital. The companies involved in funding
animal experiments are some of the world's largest multinationals.
Agri-business is becoming increasingly capitalised. In the past capital
was largely invested in the manufacture and retail of products made from
animals reared by relatively independent farmers. Today, farmers are
going out of business as larger companies take over every stage of the
animal industry. For instance, one company, the Grampian Country Food
Group supplies one-third of UK chickens to eat (200 million a year).
Direct corporate involvement in farming will be accelerated as capital
expands its new biotechnological frontier.

The animal industry continues to dominate land use in many parts of the
world. In Britain 80% of agricultural land is used directly or
indirectly for meat and dairy production (Spencer). In many parts of the
"Third World", food production is dominated by the growth of cereals to
sell for animal feed in the West rather than to meet local needs.
Animals in factory farms produced huge amounts of waste, with frequent
incidents of pollution of water and land.

In Marxist terms, meat production represents the destruction of
use-value to increase exchange-value. Food that could be used to feed
people is instead fed to animals in order to increase profit. Most of
the energy and nutrition this provides is (from an economic point of
view) wasted in keeping the cattle alive, rather than directly
transferred into muscle. Ten acres of land will support 61 people on a
diet of soya beans, 24 on wheat, 10 on maize but only 2 on meat from
cattle. Cattle are thus used by capitalism as a form of fixed capital,
consuming living and dead labour in order to produce a product (meat)
containing increased surplus value.

McDonalds has become a totem of capitalist expansion, at the cutting
edge of the development of low-waged, casualised work combined with the
most advanced spectacular techniques of marketing. No part of the world
is held to be completely subordinated to the global market until a
McDonalds has opened there. The continuing enclosure of space, marked by
deforestation and dispossession is as dependent on the animal industry
as the earlier stages of primitive accumulation. Forests are still being
cleared for animal grazing or to grow animal feed, peasants cleared from
the land to make way for international agri-business. The dynamic of
capitalism is towards more control over all life, human or animal. If
things move in the opposite direction it will only be because capital
has been forced to take a different turn or abolished altogether.

## 2. Communism

"Communism is not a programme one puts into practice or makes other put
into practice, but a social movement. Communism is not an ideal to be
realised: it already exists, not as a society, but as an effort, a task
to prepare for. It is the movement which tries to abolish the conditions
of life determined by wage-labour and it will abolish them by
revolution" (Dauv√© and Martin). Communism is not a utopian blueprint for
the future nor has it got anything to do with the "communist" regimes of
the past where capitalism was managed by the state. Communism is the
movement towards the abolition of states, classes, private property,
money and hierarchies of power, and the collective creation of the means
to satisfy our needs and desires.

"Communism is the continuation of real needs which are now already at
work, but which cannot lead anywhere, which cannot be satisfied, because
the present situation forbids it. Today there are numerous gestures and
attitudes which express not only a refusal of the present world, but
most of all an effort to build a new one" (Dauv√© and Martin). We believe
that many of the activities carried out against the exploitation of
animals fall into this category of "gestures and attitudes" and are
therefore expressions of the communist movement.

Radicals who scorn the notion of animal liberation have a long tradition
to draw upon. Marxist political economy adopted the enlightenment
project of the domination of nature in its entirety with the natural
world being perceived as an unlimited raw material for industrial
progress. Faced with the disastrous ecological consequences of
industrial development on the one hand, and the challenge of radical
ecological groups on the other, some communists have begun to criticise
this model. But few of them have been prepared to extend this critique
to the notion of human beings as the only creatures worthy of
consideration. To them we say: enemies of civilisation and progress, one
step further.

### 2.1 The secret history of animal liberation

We have our own hidden tradition to inspire us. We may not be able to
turn to the "founding fathers of communism inc." for legitimisation, but
over the centuries there have been plenty of rebels and revolutionaries
who have fought for their own liberation and that of other human beings
whilst also denouncing the abuse of animals.

As Colin Spencer demonstrates in The Heretic's Feast: A history of
vegetarianism, arguments against eating animals have been put forward
for at least as far back as written records stretch. While many have
eschewed meat for health reasons, or as part of an ascetic package of
self-denial and sacrifice, it has often been concern for animals that
has been the key factor. In ancient Greece for instance, the Orphic
mystery religion held animal sacrifice and meat eating to be equivalent
to murder. Similar views were apparently held by Pythagorus and his
followers. Many of the arguments still used today for and against eating
animals have been rehearsed for thousands of years. For instance, the
Greek writer Plutarch (AD 46-120) wrote that "We can claim no great
right over land animals which are nourished with the same food, inspire
the same air, wash in and drink the same water that we do ourselves; and
when they are slaughtered they make us ashamed". He called on carnivores
to try meat raw and not to "disguise the murdered animal by the use of
ten thousand sweet herbs and spices".

Then as now, vegetarianism was not simply a dietary choice, but had
wider implications in view of the social/symbolic power associated with
meat: "To change one's diet is to throw into doubt the relationship
between gods, men and beasts upon which the whole politico-religious
system of the city rests... To abstain from eating meat in the Greek
city-state is a highly subversive act" (Detienne).

In some areas of the world, whole communities have been primarily
vegetarian. This may be associated with the influence of Buddhist or
Hindu ideas, but it may also be the case that religious ideas simply
reflected the existing social practices. The anti-British Indian Mutiny
of 1857 was sparked by British ignorance of the importance of
vegetarianism. The immediate cause of the Mutiny was the refusal of
Indian troops to use rifle cartridges greased with animal fat (since pig
fat was used this also offended the Muslim troops).

Vegetarianism has often been associated with religious heresies, a fact
adding to their persecution. Cathar heretics brought before the Emperor
Henry III in 1052 were accused of having "condemned all eating of
animals, and with the agreement of everybody present he ordered them to
be hanged" (cited in Spencer). In China, an 1141 edict declared: "All
vegetarian demon worshippers... shall be strangulated".

It was amongst such heretic tendencies that radical communistic ideas
often flourished, circulating amongst the poor and providing inspiration
for "millenarian" revolts. In this context the refusal of meat may have
had a class dimension: "another thing about not eating meat which gave
it a social power as a spiritual message, and it was a message which was
preached not only by the Cathars but by other religions which opposed
Catholic orthodoxy in this period, was that meat was the food of the
hunters, of the dominators, of the people who rode horses, the people
who exploited the cultivators of the land, most of whose life was
singularly meatless" (Moore).

During and after the English Civil War, vegetarianism was advocated by
some Ranters like John Robins; by a Hackney bricklayer called Marshall
who argued that it was "unlawful to kill any creature that had life" and
by Thomas Tryon, who condemned "killing and oppressing his fellow
creatures" as well as slavery, war and the treatment of the insane
(Thomas).

Concern about the treatment of animals, and in some cases, vegetarianism
was found amongst eighteenth century radicals like William Blake who
wrote that "Each outcry of the hunted hare/ A fibre from the brain does
tear"; the atheist John Ritson; and John Oswald (1730-93), English
Jacobin and author of Cry of Nature. Early in the next century the poet
Shelley advocated vegetarianism in his work Queen Mab, which also
denounced war and the rule of kings and commerce.

Later in the 19th century the anarchist and Paris communard Louise
Michel declared "The origin of my revolt against the powerful was my
horror at the tortures inflicted on animals". Michel's fellow Paris
Communard Elis√©e Reclus, the anarchist communist and geographer, was a
vegetarian who opposed the slaughter of animals for food.

Occasionally, opposition to animal abuse was taken up by wider sections
of the working class. In Battersea, south London, there were riots on
the working class Latchmere Estate in 1906 as locals defended the "Brown
Dog" anti-vivisection statue from attack by doctors and medical
students.

### 2.2 The modern animal liberation movement

The modern animal liberation movement includes a diverse range of groups
and individuals opposing practices such as hunting, vivisection and the
slaughter of animals for food. Given what we have argued about the
centrality of animals to capitalism, a movement challenging the position
of animals could hardly help but impact on capital.

However, we are certainly not arguing that this movement is in totality
a revolutionary movement confronting capital. Like all social movements,
the animal liberation movement contains contradictory tendencies -- at
the one pole a socially conservative position, uncritical of capitalism,
parliamentary politics, hierarchical single-issue campaigns, at the
other a non-hierarchical, direct action-based approach placing the
particular issue in the wider context of radical social transformation.
Between these poles various combinations exist (e.g. socially
conservative, single issue-based direct action). These contradictions
cut across organisations and even individuals.

Despite the criticisms that can be made of animal liberation ideology
and practice (some of which we will set out later), some animal
liberation actions and attitudes are certainly expressions of communism.

A clear example is the practice of liberating animals from farms,
kennels and laboratories in the kind of raid pioneered by the Animal
Liberation Front in the 1970s. Saving these animals from suffering and
an early death directly confronts the logic of capital, abolishing their
status as products, commodities and raw materials by reinstating them as
living beings outside of the system of production and exchange.

Communists have criticised capitalist progress and development,
including the idea that science and technology are neutral and will lead
to a suffering-free golden age. Animal liberationists have put this
critique into practice by, for instance, disrupting research and
attacking laboratories.

Ideas of animal liberation enrich communist theory by posing the key
question of the relationship between humans and the natural world. Marx
recognised that communism involves the "genuine resolution of the
conflict between man and nature and between man and man" (1844), but his
vision of communism as a life where you could "hunt in the morning, rear
cattle in the afternoon" suggests that he did not really think through
what this would involve.

As Camatte argues, "The proletarian movement unfortunately retained
certain presuppositions of capital, in particular... the vision of
progress; the exaltation of science; the necessity of distinguishing the
human from the animal, with the latter being considered in every case
inferior; the idea of the exploitation of nature.... All this meant that
the demand for a human community was kept within the limits of capital".
Apparent single issue movements focusing on, for instance, animal
liberation are therefore necessary to correct "the shortcomings of the
classical revolutionary movement... which had become infested with
notions of power and domination".

Animal liberation perspectives enable us to see that if the
reconciliation of humans and nature is to be more than an empty wish,
concrete measures have to be taken to change the way humans relate to
animals, such as dismantling the technology of factory farming. They
also raise the question of extending the notion of community beyond
humans to embrace other species -- the fact that animals may not be able
to participate in the community as active subjects does not mean they
have to be simply objects for human use. As Elis√©e Reclus argued: "When
our civilisation, ferociously individualist as it is, and dividing the
world into as many little hostile States as there are separate
properties and different family households -- when its last bankruptcy
shall have been declared... then we shall remember all these species
that have been left behind on our forward route, and shall endeavour to
make of them, not servants or machines, but veritable companions".

Some anarchists and communists argue that the "animal question" is
irrelevant because animals cannot fight for themselves: "Animals can
never play a part in class recomposition" (Aufheben, 1995). Yet any
class recomposition that does not express the inter-relatedness between
humans and other forms of life risks staying on the terrain of capital.
By this we mean that the working class needs to overcome its
fragmentation and assert itself not only to get a better deal as a
component of the capitalist machine, but to challenge the relationship
between this machine and life on the planet, human, animal and
vegetable.

### 2.3 Everything that walks on the earth is governed by blows

This brings us to the main "communist" argument against animal
liberation, that those involved are "projecting the horrors of
capitalism away from themselves" rather than "fighting for themselves".
This is sometimes linked to the situationist notion of radical
subjectivity in which revolution is seen as the expression of individual
needs and desires.

Such an approach tends to ignore the fact that people are social animals
who do not exist as independent beings in themselves. They exist through
social interaction, with other humans, animals and the wider
environment. The communist impulse is not just a matter of enlightened
self-interest but an expression of our wider communal being in this
sense. In any case the need to live in a world where the alienation
between humans and nature is overcome has always been part of the
communist project, and is as important a need as the more obvious
material ones like food and housing.

We don't see those who actively express this need as being alienated
from their own, real needs. On the contrary, as an article on the mass
opposition to live animal exports in the mid-1990's put it: "The fact
that people are moved to confront the state by the suffering of animals
at least gives us hope that people are not completely alienated" (Do or
Die).

The basis of working class concern about animals is not misplaced
sentimentality (though we think that sentiment is at least as legitimate
a human response as detached scientific rationality) but empathy arising
from a shared condition as beasts of burden: "everything that moves on
the earth is governed by blows" (Os Cangaceiros). As we argued earlier,
the techniques of domination of humans and animals are historically
interlinked. For instance, animals are used in experiments precisely
because they are similar to humans in some way. If some one feels
revulsion at the experiments where a cat or monkey has electrodes
planted into their brains, then that is a valid survival "instinct".
Those animals are only tortured in those experiments because capital
wants to be able to do the same thing to people.

If this empathy has been largely absent from revolutionary theory, it
has found expression in revolutionary situations. During the Diggers
occupation of St George's Hill in 1649, Gerrard Winstanley reported that
"tender hearts" grieved to see their cows beaten by the lord of the
manor's bailiffs -- after all hadn't they been subject to the same
beatings? In the Paris Commune (1871) Louise Michel found time between
shooting cops and guarding the barricades to rescue a frightened cat,
arguing in her memoirs that "everything fits together, from the bird
whose brood is crushed to the humans whose nest is destroyed by war"
(Lowry and Gunter). In prison in 1917, Rosa Luxemburg expressed her
empathy with the buffalo she saw being mistreated from her cell: "The
suffering of a dearly loved brother could hardly have moved me more...
Poor wretch, I am as powerless, as dumb, as yourself; I am at one with
you in my pain, my weakness and my longing" (Letter to Sonja Liebknecht,
Dec. 1917).

Compassion is not a word found very frequently in revolutionary
discourse, but as Communist Headache argue in relation to animals: "Part
of class struggle is the struggle against domination. This includes
understanding how we are dominated and understanding how we are taught
to fetishize domination and so dominate each other within our class.
Domination can be countered by compassion, however this compassion needs
to be rediscovered as part of a class struggle in which people are
coming together in the human community".

### 2.4 Confronting the state

In practical terms, participation in action against the abuse of animals
involves people in confronting the state (the police, the courts, the
law, etc.) and developing imaginative strategies for so doing. Hunt
sabbing for example can involve the elaborate use of vehicles,
communications, maps and other tools to frustrate the efforts of police
and hunt supporters to stop them. It also involves a mass defiance of
trespass laws, a general refusal to recognise that the countryside
belongs to wealthy individuals who are entitled to do what they like to
the animals (and people) who live there.

Hunt sabbing is one of the few forms of animal-related activity to get a
begrudging respect from traditional communists. Uniquely it can involve
an unmediated confrontation with individual members of the ruling class.
Many hunt sabs despise hunters because of what they do to foxes and
because they are rich, although those who go sabbing in the expectation
of a weekly re-enactment of the peasants revolt can be disappointed at
the reality of hours sitting in the back of vans or sneaking through the
woods.

While opposition to hunting might not in itself be a marker for
subversive attitudes, the act of attempting to sabotage it directly is
another matter. New Labour opponents of hunting continue to support the
use of repressive legislation against hunt sabs because they recognise
the threat posed by groups of (mainly) working class people taking
matters into their own hands in defiance of the law.

Other struggles have involved mass confrontation with the state. The
movement against live animal exports (1994/95) at Shoreham in Kent and
Brightlingsea in Essex saw thousands of local people blocking roads and
standing up to the police over several months. The successful movement
to close Hillgrove Farm in Oxfordshire, a cat breeder for vivisection,
involved frequent violent clashes on the regular demos leading up to its
closure in summer 1999. In all these cases, thousands of police were
unleashed with baton charges and intense surveillance -- at Hillgrove
police used section 60 of the Criminal Justice Act to stop and search
everybody within a 5 mile radius of the farm who appeared to be on their
way to demonstrate (Animal magazine). Whatever the limitations of these
movements they posed fundamental questions for those involved about the
role of the state and the nature of industrial processes.

Many people who are or have been involved in action against animal abuse
have also been involved in other struggles. In this way, the range of
practical skills developed in the animal liberation movement have
circulated around struggles, becoming tools that can be applied in
different situations. This covers everything from printing a leaflet, or
moving vans of people around at short notice to clandestine forms of
organisation and prisoner solidarity.

### 2.5 Beyond the ideology of animal rights

Struggles against animal exploitation are (in many cases) an expression
of the communist movement, a real social movement suppressing existing
conditions. While it addresses only a single issue, animal liberation
does pose fundamental questions about the relationship of humans to the
world. This can be a starting point for a fundamental questioning of the
way we live our lives; on the other hand animal rights ideology can
become a limit which prevents a wider critique of society. We need to go
beyond this ideology without abandoning what is subversive within what
it represents.

"Spectacular production is obviously keen to keep the unpalatable side
of production hidden" (Law). Those who take the trouble to look behind
the screen can be so overwhelmed by the horrors they find there, that
everything else seems almost irrelevant. The conflict between humans and
animals can come to be regarded as completely overriding any social
contradictions, including class, and some individuals can even develop a
form of misanthropy in which all humans are seen as intrinsically "bad"
with the exception of the valiant few who totally abstain from animal
produce.

Total abstention is more or less impossible, and to moralistically
condemn others for not going far enough only limits the scope for a
movement to develop. Nevertheless, vegetarianism/veganism is not just a
matter of sanctimonious handwashing. The "question of a loving and
respectful relationship with other living beings" necessarily involves
"a rejection of nutrition that comes, not only from the genetic
manipulation of animals, but also from their cruel treatment in battery
conditions or laboratories" (Dalla Costa). Not eating animals brings
about qualitative improvement in the well-being of animals (as well as
quantitative reduction in animals killed), even if as an isolated act it
can be commodified and turned into another lifestyle marketing niche.

From the standpoint of animals a vegetarian capitalism would be a step
forward. But for reasons we have set out earlier, this is an extremely
unlikely outcome given the vested interests of the animal industry and
the ingrained habits of daily life under capitalism. Moreover vegetarian
capitalism would still be dependent upon the exploitation of human
animals and the subordination of all forms of life and their habitats to
the needs of the economy. So we would have to say Neither McDonalds nor
McCartney but international communism!

An overemphasis on boycotting the products of particular companies is
based on a misunderstanding of the nature of capitalism. Capitalism is
more than the combined efforts of "bad" multinational corporations. It
is based on social relations mediated by property and money. As long as
these relations exist capitalism will reproduce itself, regardless of
the fate of any particular company. In any case, we can't really
separate any one enterprise from the workings of the economy as a whole.
Capital flows freely wherever there is a profit to be made, with the
same individuals or institutions investing happily in both "bad
multinationals" and "cruelty free corporations".

The lack of understanding of the dynamics of present day society, of a
class analysis, can result in attacks on low-level workers in industries
which exploit animals, as if they are as equally responsible as the
managers or bosses. It is ludicrous, as occasionally happens, for
McDonalds workers to be denounced as "scum" when their exploitation is
as central to the company's profits as the dead cows in the buns.

We can all recognise these problems, and it suits the views of many
anarchists and communists to pretend that all animal liberation
activities take place in this reactionary framework. This is not the
case. Notably the movement against McDonalds is an actually existing
international struggle that takes on work conditions, the critique of
the spectacular-commodity and ecological issues as well as animal
exploitation, and has even managed to involve meat eaters.

### 2.6 What's wrong with rights?

We are critical of the notion of animal rights for the same reason that
we criticise human rights. The ideology of rights arose with the
capitalist revolutions of the 17th and 18th centuries, in particular the
French Revolution. This ideology played a political and moral compliment
to capitalist economics. In the capitalist market, commodities are
exchanged on the basis of equality to a sum of money, whether that
commodity is sugar or a week's work. In the political sphere, people are
made equal through the granting of rights to everyone. Behind the facade
of rights, the dictatorship of capital perseveres, just as the
domination of the worker by capital perseveres behind the equal exchange
of the labour market.

The notion that we all have rights disguises real inequalities. As
Anatole France once said, the rich and the poor alike have the right to
sleep on the streets. We all have the right to buy a palace, but we
don't all have the means to do so. As a legalistic concept, rights imply
a state to defend and enforce them, which means the preservation of the
alienation of individuals from each other, and hence alienation between
humans and nature, including other animals.

The bourgeois character of rights has become increasingly apparent with
the emphasis on rights and responsibilities. In other words, rights are
conditionally granted only to those who play the game and can just as
easily be taken away. Rights are a limited recognition granted by the
powerful to the less powerful, and as such "animal rights" implies at
least a separation between people and animals, and the definitive
superiority of people. The end of animal abuse requires the destruction
of the capitalist, and indeed civilised relationship between humans and
the animal world, and its replacement not with an abstract equality (a
capitalistic notion, as in the equality in market exchange of dissimilar
goods), but with an appreciation of the difference of the other as an
element in social reality.

There is a need to move beyond "animal rights" as such, in order to
fight more effectively. People need to understand why animal
exploitation occurs as well as how. This is not because we think that
everything has to be postponed until "after the revolution" but because
the real emancipation of animals and humans requires a fundamental
social transformation in the direction of communism.

### 2.7 Animals in a Communist Society

Although we would regard aspects of animal liberation as expressions of
communism, opposition to the abuse of animals does not always sit
comfortably with other aspects of the communist movement. Animal
liberation "doesn't just pose an aspect of what appears to be wrong with
capitalism which revolutionaries can then fit into their general
blueprint for class struggle. It makes demands on a both a perceived
revolutionary process and a perceived revolutionary direction"
(Communist Headache).

In some areas there may be apparent contradictions. For instance in
Brazil, landless labourers are occupying land belonging to big
landowners and cultivating it, including rearing animals. This is an
expression of the communist movement too. But the communist movement is
not a monolithic entity united around a party line. It is a dynamic
entity composed of diverse, and sometimes contradictory efforts. There
are many issues on which a range of different positions are possible --
for instance the use of technology.

Disagreements would continue even in the society that would emerge as
the communist movement developed to a stage where capitalism was in the
process of being abolished across large parts of the world. Communism is
not the application of a universal moral code, or the creation of a
uniform society, and there would be no state or similar mechanism to
impose, say, veganism, even if many people thought it desirable. The
question of how to live with animals might be resolved in different ways
in different times and places. The animal liberation movement would form
one pole of the debate.

Others might take a different position, arguing perhaps for free range,
non-intensive domestication of the goat in the garden variety (although
this apparent idyll would probably still have to involve cruel practices
like castration and the separation of animals from their social units).

We can say with confidence though that the status quo would be
untenable, and that there would be a radical transformation of the
relations between humans and other species.

With the abolition of capitalism, the vested interests of the animal
industry would no longer exist; there would be no corporate propaganda
for meat. The origins of animal products would no longer be disguised;
the production process would be transparent. People would make the
decision about whether to eat animal products on the basis of a clear
understanding of the health and social benefits and the impact on
animals not on the basis of supermarket packaging. This would take place
in the context of a process of radical change involving a questioning of
much that passes for "normal" in everyday life. We would also expect the
removal of systematic violence from human relations to create a
generally more compassionate society.

As part of the factory system, factory farms would come to an end -- who
would want to work in them anyway? We would also expect a move to
restore wilderness and reduce the amount of land given over to
agriculture. As we have seen, growing food for animals and then eating
the animals uses up a lot more land than just producing vegetables for
humans to eat.

Anthropocentric humanism has been detrimental to humans as well as
animals: "The brutal confinement of animals ultimately serves only to
separate men and women from their own potentialities" (Surrealist Group,
cited in Law). What Camatte calls "the biological dimension of the
revolution" will involve the rediscovery of those aspects of humanity,
some labelled as "bestial", that have been underdeveloped by capital
such as rhythm, imagination and wildness.

One consequence of this would be that humans would no longer see
themselves as always above and distinct from other animals:
"Communism... is not domination of nature but reconciliation, and thus
regeneration of nature: human beings no longer treat nature simply as an
object for their development, as a useful thing, but as a subject... not
separate from them if only because nature is in them" (Camatte).

## PostScript: Anarcho-punk, the ALF and the miners' strike -- a cautionary tale from the 1980s

>I have a sense of both fear and repugnance when I see comrades who hate
>their past or, worse still, who mystify it. I'm not denying my past,
>for example my workerist past; on the contrary, I claim it. If we toss
>everything away, we live in a condition of permanent schizophrenia.
>(Sergio Bologna, quoted in Wright 1996)

_This account of the movement through anarcho-punk to class politics in
the 1980s is very much based on our own experiences. We think that it is
worth talking about because it is also relevant to other times and
situations. Questions about animals and the environment are often
associated with so-called "counter-cultural" scenes, and tend to be
jettisoned as people engage with more traditional radical politics. We
can see parallels with the way significant numbers of politicised
"hippies" were absorbed by the International Socialists (now the SWP)
and similar groups in the late 1960s/early 1970s. Today with numbers of
anti-roads protesters adopting or moving towards communist positions,
its as well to point out the errors that were made by the early 80's
generation. Adopting communist analyses can be a step forward, but not
if it means abandoning what is already subversive in your activity._

In the early 1980s the anarchist movement in Britain got the kick up the
arse it sorely needed with an influx of politicised punk activists. The
anarcho-punk scene was associated with nationally-known bands like
Crass, the Poison Girls, and Conflict but in towns across the country
(and indeed across Europe and beyond) thousands of people formed bands,
put on squat gigs and generally raged against the machine. Politically
the emphasis was on a mixture of lifestylist abstention from "the
system" (refusal to work, boycotts of everything under the sun) and
direct action against "multi-death corporations". The high point in
Britain came in 1983/84 when thousands of people converged on the
financial centre of London for the Stop the City actions, particularly
targeting firms associated with the arms trade, ecological destruction
and animal exploitation.

Animal liberation was central to anarcho-punk. Seemingly every band had
at least one song about hunting or vivisection, and record sleeves
featured graphic images of animals in various postures of suffering.
Many punks adopted a vegan lifestyle and threw themselves into animal
activism -- punks made up the majority of many hunt sab groups.

The same period saw the direct action animal liberation movement reach
new heights. The Animal Liberation Front had been established in 1976
and by the early 1980s raids to rescue animals from laboratories and
acts of economic sabotage against hunting, factory farming and
vivisection targets were becoming increasingly common and enjoying
widespread support. The ALF was, and remains, an organisation of
decentralised cells, with a parallel supporters group structure putting
people in touch with each other, handling press releases, and helping
organise prisoner support. As well as the core of regular activists
there was a broader fringe of people using the name as a flag of
convenience for acts of low-level sabotage such as breaking windows and
gluing up locks.

Alongside the ALF there was a wider movement of direct action, including
militant demonstrations (2000 people entered the military's Porton Down
lab site in 1982) and mass raids on laboratories to gather evidence of
animal cruelty (rather than to liberate animals). In 1984 hundreds of
people took part in Northern, South East and Eastern Animal Liberation
League raids on major laboratories including ICI, Unilever and Wickham.
Inevitably state repression and the criminalisation of the movement was
stepped up -- 25 people were jailed for the Unilever action.

1984 also saw the start of the longest and bitterest fought episode in
the class struggle for many years in Britain -- the miners' strike. The
strike posed a major, and ultimately terminal challenge for anarcho-punk
ideology. Crudely, this world view tended to moralistically divide the
world into two camps -- the good (people who thought and acted like
anarcho punks) and the bad (those who collaborated with the system). At
the start of the strike many punks would have put the miners in the
latter category -- after all didn't most of them eat meat, and weren't
they only fighting because they wanted to work? Facing with increasing
social polarisation around the strike, and the inspiring resistance of
militant miners, almost everybody jumped the right way off the fence.
Led by the Leeds-based Chumbawamba (years before their Top of the Pops
days), most anarcho bands including Crass had played miners benefits by
the end of the strike.

The violence of the miners' strike also weakened the hold of pacifism on
the punk scene. The new mood was given expression in the paper Class
War, launched in 1983, which combined punk style graphics and imagery
with a language of class violence and revolution. The early Class War
was fairly clear that animal liberation was part of the revolutionary
movement against capitalist society. Announcing the launch of its 1984
"Spring Offensive" against the rich, the front cover of the paper
featured a picture of a fox hunter and the slogan "you rich fucking
scumbag -- we're gonna get you". An article in the same issue declared:
"Class War fully supports the movement for animal liberation. Many of us
are active in Hunt Saboteurs and take part in attacks on animal
exploitation labs and factories around the country".

Class War intervened at antivivisection marches denouncing "the
bureaucrats of the BUAV" (British Union for the Abolition of
Vivisection) for their fear of "the growing militancy of the animal
liberation movement, the increased daring of its attacks on property and
confrontations of the police". For their troubles they were denounced by
the BUAV as agent provocateurs after clashes with police at Biorex
laboratories in Islington. Class War saw the militancy of the movement
as an inspiration, expressing the hope that "violent attacks on animal
exploitation establishments will spill over into violent attacks on
other parts of this shit society". However as Class War turned itself
into a national federation (without some of its founder members)
embracing more traditional workerist politics, animal liberation
disappeared from view.

The anarcho-punk scene began to fragment. Crass called it a day, and
scenes across the country fell apart into sometimes acrimonious
factions. Some people tried to just carry on as before -- an
anarcho-punk scene defined by the politics of the early 1980s continues
to this day, albeit as a narrow subculture rather than a thriving
movement. Some took the lifestyle option to its extreme, taking to the
road as travellers or heading off to live on the land in Ireland. Some
pursued the drugs option. Some just put it all behind them as a youthful
(mis)adventure.

Some of those who remained primarily focused on animals were caught up
in a spiral of increasing repression and the isolated militancy of a
small number of activists. Mass direct action was increasingly eclipsed
by arson campaigns, poisoning scares, and even bomb attacks claimed by
the Animal Rights Militia.

Most of the (ex) anarcho-punks who remained politically engaged were
moving in a completely different direction, rediscovering various forms
of class struggle politics. Class War benefited most from this, but all
the currents of the libertarian/communist milieu experienced an influx
of new blood, including the anarcho-syndicalist Direct Action Movement,
the Anarchist Communist Federation and the various ultra-left and
post-situationist scenes.

From the point of view of the development of a radical anti-capitalist
movement this could have been a major step forward, combining the
subversive practice and imagination of the anarcho-punk scene with a
clearer understanding of capitalism and communism. But this didn't
happen. Instead most people simply jettisoned their previous views and
adopted traditional anarchist or Marxist ideologies wholesale. Haircuts,
clothes and diets changed rapidly as people rushed to adopt the dead end
"working class identity" that they had earlier tried so hard to escape
from.

Animals were now irrelevant, and if anything eating meat was a badge of
the "ordinary people". Some "Vegan police" who had moralistically
condemned others for eating meat, now criticised vegetarians for not
eating meat: the diet changed but the self-righteous attitude stayed the
same. Concern about animals was derided as middle class and liberal.

These views continue to shape the perceptions of many radicals today,
particularly those who trace their political development back to the
1980s split in the anarcho-punk scene.

With hindsight, the most that can be said about developments of the
1980s was that it represented a step sideways from one confused set of
ideas to another. People were no more or less working class when they
adopted their patronising "prolecult" lifestyle than when they were
punks. Being working class has got nothing to do with what you wear, eat
or how you talk -- it's about being subjected to a life dominated by
work (this applies not just to people in waged work, but the unemployed
whose conditions of existence are determined by their relation to the
labour market).

Ex-punks starting to eat meat went hand in hand with the reversal of
pacifism into the advocacy of violence and terror, down to the level of
"red-blooded" flesh devouring communists advocating a "red terror". But
what was (and is) needed is not the replacement of one mistaken position
with its negative, but a synthesis that goes beyond the mirror-image
opposition.

Class struggle anarchists recognised the fundamental social conflicts
shaping people's experiences. But often their critique of the world went
little further than a call for the working class to run things, factory
farms, slaughterhouses and all. Presumably for them the problem with
McDonalds was that it wasn't democratically run on a not-for-profit
basis. Despite its individualist and moralistic emphasis, anarcho-punk
did in some ways pose a broader critique of capitalism as a way of life.
It refused to take the products on the supermarket shelf at face value,
sometimes obsessively documenting the chain of human and animal
dispossession leading up to the burger in the bun.

And despite having a more coherent world view, many born-again class
struggle anarchists actually had a less subversive relation to the world
than before. Anarcho-punk did involve a practical critique of the way
things are, not just at the level of direct action but in the
development of different ways of doing things such as creating
alternatives to the commercial distribution of music. For many class
struggle anarchists, the development of subversive relations between
people was endlessly deferred until after the revolution, or at least
until after the next paper sale. We can even see the resurgence of
traditional workerist politics as the reintegration of a radical
questioning of life under capitalism.

Animal liberation may have been written out of the personal biographies
and political histories of revolutionary politics, but we would argue
that it has made a significant contribution to the development of the
communist movement. It has equipped people with a range of practical
skills that can be applied in different situations. It has also helped
pose the fundamental social question of the relationship between humans
and the rest of the natural world.

## Sources

* Adams, Carol (1990), The sexual politics of meat.
* Animal magazine (1998, no.3), The battle of Hillgrove.
* Animal magazine (1998, no.3), New Alliances on the Right.
* Arkangel magazine (1999, no.21), Feminists for Animal Rights.
* Aufheben magazine (1995, no.4), Kill or chill: analysis of the
  opposition to the Criminal Justice Bill.
* Baker, Steve (1993), Picturing the Beast: Animals, identity and
  representation.
* Barthes, Roland (1972), Mythologies.
* Camatte, Jacques (1995), This world we must leave and other essays.
* Collectivities (1997), A Ballad against Work.
* Colley, Linda (1994), Britons: forging the nation 1707-1837
* Communist Headache magazine (1995), On Speciesism.
* Critical Art Ensemble (1998), Flesh Machine: cyborgs, designer babies
  and new eugenic consciousness.
* Dalla Costa, M (1998), The native in us, the earth we belong to in
  Common Sense no. 23.
* Dauv√©, Gilles and Martin, Fran√ßois (1998), The eclipse and
  re-emergence of the communist movement.
* Detienne, Marcel (1979), Dionysus Slain.
* Do or Die! -- voices from Earth First! (no.5), Shoreham: live exports
  and community defence.
* Ehrenberg, Margaret (1989), Women in Prehistory.
* Hodder, Ian (1990), The Domestication of Europe: structure and
  contingency in neolithic societies.
* Horniman Museum (1999), African worlds exhibition.
* Information on Ireland (1984), Nothing but the same old story: the
  roots of anti-Irish racism.
* Law, Larry (1982), Spectacular Times: Animals.
* Linebaugh, Peter (1991), The London Hanged: Crime and Civil Society in
  the Eighteenth Century.
* Lowry, B and E.E. Gunter, EE, eds. (1981), The red virgin: memoirs of
  Louise Michel.
* Marx, Karl (1844), Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts.
* Marx, Karl (1867), Capital, volume one.
* Moore, R.I. (1985), Origins of European Dissent.
* Os Cangaceiros (1989?), Everything that moves on the earth is governed
  by blows.
* Perlman, Fredy (1983), Against His-story, against Leviathan!
* Reclus, Elis√©e (reprinted 1996), The great kinship of humans and
  fauna.
* Rifkin, Jeremy (1994), Beyond Beef.
* Ritvo, Harriet (1987), The Animal Estate: the English and Other
  Creatures in the Victorian Age.
* Serpell, James (1996), In the company of animals: a study of
  human-animal relationships.
* Spencer, Colin (1995), The Heretic's Feast: a history of
  vegetarianism.
* Thomas, Keith (1983), Man and the Natural World: changing attitudes in
  England, 1500-1800.
* Wangford, Hank (1995) The Lost Cowboys.
* Wright, Steve (1996), Negri's Class Analysis: Italian Autonomist
  Theory in the Seventies in Reconstruction 8, Winter/Spring 1996.
* Zerzan, John (1994), Future primitive and other essays.
