---
title: "Wooden Shoes or Platform Shoes: Class Struggle Social Democrats: Or, The Press of Business"
author: Black, Bob
date: 2007
description: "From Anarchy: A Journal of Desire Armed, no. 64. Sourced from <https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/bob-black-class-struggle-social-democrats-or-the-press-of-business>."
...

_2007 Publishing & Distribution Catalog_  
AK Press 2006, 80 pages, paper.

This is a leaner, meaner AK Press Catalog than the previous annuals
"which g\[ot\] longer and more expensive each year," thus announcing up
front what AK Press is about: money. "We are highlighting the AK Press
editions" -- from which AK profits twice, as publisher and as
distributor -- and "new distribution items" (to see if they sell well
enough to qualify for the third category, which is) "a selection of
customer favorites" (faster moving product). There is of course some
self-fulfilling circularity here. Product sells because it is
advertised, and is advertised because it sells. But quality is not
mentioned as a consideration in AK marketing decisions, any more than it
figures in AK publishing decisions. AK is at least consistent. But so
are serial killers.

Nonetheless, the new catalog is otherwise just like the earlier versions
"less of more of the same," as some wag once witticized. A majority of
the material AK publishes, and a still larger majority of what it
distributes, is still not anarchist. Not merely not anarchist in some
purist sense, but not anarchist by any stretch of the imagination (a
quality notably lacking, anyway, at AK Press), and not even marketed as
anarchist by the AK Press Gang.

Likewise the tradition continues of reserving the cover illustration for
authoritarian leftists. This time it depicts macho Black Panther Party
leaders posturing at a press conference, and is taken from a new AK
production, an over twelve-hour DVD on this racial nationalist, male
supremacist, agent-ridden gang. The police so exaggerated the Party's
own revolutionary chest-thumping that they came to believe their own
lies and violently suppressed the Party. I wonder if the footage
includes the odious odysseys of Huey Newton (gunned down during a drug
deal) and Eldridge Cleaver (who, even before hiring out to the right,
celebrated his rape of white women as an affirmation of his black
manhood). I hope it also includes a Panther leader's speech to the last
SDS convention, orating that the proper position for women in the
movement was prone. (Did he mean "supine," or was he a sodomite?) There
was nothing anarchist about this self-styled vanguard party, unless you
count its brief, overpublicized operation of a soup kitchen.

The nine new AK titles are a fair biopsy (would that it were an autopsy)
of the Catalog. Only two titles are unequivocally anarchist. The only
book worth reading is the reprint of _Vision on Fire: Emma Goldman on
the Spanish Revolution_. Typically it is by a member of the classical
anarchist pantheon. AK would never publish anything so radical if
Goldman were writing today. The other title is _Rebel Alliances_ by Ben
Franks, "Concentrating on the class-struggle tradition within anarchism,
as represented by the current national federations in Britain." There
are books that you can't put down. This is one that you can't pick up. I
can put it down without picking it up.

There's a CD from fading pop stars and self-styled anarchists
Chumbawamba, one of AK's financial angels (the others are Noam Chomsky
and AK founder Ramsay Kanaan's rich mother, whose initials are "AK").
And there is an anthology of "academic scholars and engaged individuals"
(yawn) co-edited by fired professor David Graeber, an example of a
familiar figure on the AK scene: a social democrat who calls himself an
anarchist. But anyway this is not an anarchist book. The rest? There is
the Panther DVD; the Stalinist old (public) school boy Alexander
Cockburn; liberal publicity hound Jello Biafra; media critic Robert
Fisk; and the unspeakable Ward Churchill.

Churchill is truly a piece of work: ex-Long Range Recon ("search and
destroy") in Vietnam; ex-Weatherman; ex-white man; American Indian
Movement splitter; tenured faculty without a Ph.D or a single scholarly
publication; non-Indian pan-Indian nationalist; anti-Semite; and,
needless to say (but, in a letter to _AJODA_, he did say it), no
anarchist. AK Press is forever fumbling for his zipper. Churchill always
publishes there the books that even other leftist publishers shrink
from. He was keynote speaker at the (unofficially) AK-controlled Bay
Area Anarchist Bookfair two years ago. When David Horowitz and other
right-wingers campaign against campus academic freedom, Exhibit A is
always Ward Churchill. Churchill has always had agent provocateur
written all over him. That is how many Native American activists regard
him. As I once remarked (_AJODA_ #46), "You'd have to be awfully stupid,
even by lax anarchist standards, not to notice that this guy has always
had agent provocateur written all over him." And as Churchill himself
once observed in this magazine, you don't have to be an agent to do an
agent's work.

Churchill realized and suppressed himself and, if he has handlers, may
have made himself too hot to handle with his infamous essay on 9/11. His
argument: Everybody who perished at the World Trade Center (including,
presumably, the airline passengers) got what they had coming: not just
the lawyers and bankers and stockbrokers and (later) the cops, but also
the secretaries, the bank tellers, the janitors, the parking lot
attendants, and (later) the firemen. The little people were "little
Eichmanns." He really said that, although AK calls all of the criticism
a "smear campaign" against what were merely "controversial remarks
concerning the culpabilities of the functionaries administering U.S.
economic and political policies," such as fry cooks and temps.
Presumably an employee of the University (and therefore of the State) of
Colorado like Churchill does not qualify as such a functionary. Not a
few who died that day were nonwhite, unlike Professor Churchill. Rumor
has it that, to avoid litigation and further bad publicity, the
University is buying out Churchill's tenured position. Rest assured that
he will, literally, sell out. AK will hail him as a hero and martyr.

It's not possible to provide even thumbnail reviews of the many AK Press
books which no anarchist publisher could possibly publish. The catalog,
like the larger selection on the website, consists overwhelmingly of
books and other products whose politics are nationalist, liberal,
Marxist, social democratic, authoritarian (so-called radical) feminist,
liberal feminist, Third Worldist, or racist. AK's relation to Noam
Chomsky, as to Chumbawamba, is corrupt. As to them, AK functions as a
vanity press masquerading as an independent publisher. The current,
slimmed-down catalog carries 16 Chomsky titles. Most consist of
tendentious, repetitive ephemera: speeches and interviews. Churchill is
also getting to that point, probably more out of laziness and contempt
for his publisher and readers than because of the old age, fatigue, and
peevish impatience which noticeably afflict Chomsky, who cannot
understand why anyone still disagrees with him about anything.

Chomsky's interview in _AJODA_ #29 disclosed how utterly out of touch he
is with contemporary anarchism. El Presidente Hugo Chavez (a statist
leftist with authoritarian tendencies) may have learned something about
US imperialism from Chomsky, as he related to the UN General Assembly,
but a lot more people have gotten the same lowdown from Harper's or The
New Yorker, or from many alternative and small press publications and
internet sites. But now we have _Chomsky on Anarchism!_ After 40 years,
he has outed himself as an anarchist. Who would have ever suspected it?
Certainly nobody who read all the Stalinist and nationalist manifestos
he signed in full page ads in the New York Review of Books (By People
Who Write for the New York Review of Books).

I mean really, why reprint, from 1970, _At War with Asia: Essays on
Indochina_? Is there currently no unpublished anarchist book more worthy
of publication by an anarchist publisher? Even AK says it has 20 more
titles it would publish next year if it could. C.A.L. Press has several
in the pipeline, but lacks for sugar daddies. Chomsky was, and is, like
AK Press, an anti-imperialist fellow traveler, a sucker for any Third
World authoritarian nationalist gang that seizes state power, or tries
to, or wants to.

Or why publish and showcase in the print catalog any book by the
unscrupulous manipulator Michael Albert? Especially _Moving Forward:
Program for a Participatory Economy_ ("Parecon")? AK asks: "If not
capitalism, then what?" Albert answers: Capitalism. "The only game in
town at the moment," echoes AK. Capitalism is a participatory economy.
For most people, their participation assumes the commodity-form of
wage-labor. Albert has his own vanity press, South End Press, so why
does AK publish him, unless as an affirmation of solidarity with
Albert's program of self-managed capitalism (say, sort of like AK Press
itself!)? According to Leibnitz's Law of the Identity of Indiscernibles,
if every predicate of X is possessed by Y, and every predicate of Y is
possessed by X, then X and Y are identical. Let X = AK Press and let Y =
South End Press, and it follows that they are identical. Even Albert,
who is capable of almost any misrepresentation, isn't impudent enough to
claim to be an anarchist.

Two years ago, at a get-together of some of the BASTARD conference
organizers, somebody asked, "What does 'para' mean?" in expressions like
paralegal, paramedic, etc. Someone else said, "Para means 'something
like.'" "So then," I asked, "does Parecon mean 'something like a con?'"

And then there is AK's relation with the late Murray Bookchin, whose
books AK cheerfully reprints, years after Bookchin announced that, not
only was he not an anarchist, he had never been one -- something his
many critics had long since demonstrated. This too is likely a corrupt
or at least a profit-driven decision. I suspect that Bookchin subsidized
these publications; even if he didn't, AK trades on his perceived name
recognition, as on Chomsky's. (Bookchin, incidentally, hated Chomsky for
being more famous than he was. Chomsky ignored Bookchin.)

In 1995, AK published Bookchin's _Social Anarchism Versus Lifestyle
Anarchism_, a senile ostensibly class-struggle diatribe against
everything interesting in contemporary anarchism. Including Hakim
Bey/Peter Lamborn Wilson (_Immediatism_ -- currently reprinted by AK
Press!), who was for Bookchin the most decadent of all "lifestyle
anarchists," although Bookchin was too puritanical to mention the
biggest reason for his disgust (Bey is an out, proud pedophile). Now AK
reprints Bookchin's 1971 anarchist debut, _Post Scarcity Anarchism_, in
its "Working Classic" series no less, oblivious to the fact that this
collection absolutely denounced class struggle revolution as passe and
irrelevant, for instance, to Paris May/June 1968, which Bookchin
falsely claimed to have observed at first hand, and which he diagnosed
as a trans-class revolution.

Since AK Press is more of a commercial than a political enterprise,
let's look at how it plays its capitalist game, the only game in town.
Although AK is well-capitalized, its books are overpriced -- just
compare them to the books of C.A.L. Press or Autonomedia, which are
without wealthy sponsors, although Bey (of Autonomedia), like Kanaan,
may be investing the benefits of family wealth. Nonetheless AK books
are, even aside from their content, of poor quality. Their covers are
often ugly, including those designed by the "famed," "renowned" artist
Freddie Baer (famed and renowned mainly as a gossip who is no longer
spoken to by anybody interesting enough to gossip about). Typos,
misspellings and grammatical errors abound. There is usually no index,
although with current word-processing technology, it is easy to quickly,
easily, and cheaply construct one. AK Press apparently does not edit for
content, although it censors for content, as it did the Introduction of
_Dreams of Freedom_ (see the full version in _AJODA_ #62).

Some people may say that, for all its faults, on balance AK Press makes
a positive contribution to anarchism, because it occasionally publishes
or reprints worthy anarchist books, or at least books worthy of
anarchist interest. But it's not just a matter of more is better. AK
Press is not just a poor excuse for an anarchist publisher. It is also a
malign influence on genuine anarchist publishing. When AK publishes a
poorly produced, badly edited, overpriced edition of even, say, an
anarchist classic for which there is only a limited market it
effectively precludes any other anarchist or small press or independent
publisher from publishing the same book, even if that publisher could
have done a better job, and maybe even sold more copies. The Magon
anthology _Dreams of Freedom_ may be such a book. But some authors would
rather be published certainly or sooner, even in a sloppy version, than
uncertainly or later. Deceased authors have no say in the matter. But
the more books AK publishes, especially since it is also a distributor,
the more it consolidates its near hegemony over the publication of
anarchist books, although those books are a sideline to its much larger
project of leftist publishing.

That business reality may well influence the content of anarchist
writing too, in predictably conservative, workerist, social democratic,
moralist, and reformist directions. Authors may be writing (or may have
already written) with an eye to AK's obvious predilections. AK Press
poses a serious problem, and potentially a crisis, for British and North
American revolutionary anarchists. How has this happened? The revival
and steady growth of anarchism in the last several decades has made it
interesting, not only to the police and the press, but also to leftist
ideologues and small-scale venture capitalists, who are sometimes the
same (such as Ramsay Kanaan; cf. Caitlin Manning dba _Processed World_).
Anarchists think of themselves as a movement, potentially anyway, but
capitalists may think of us, not implausibly, as less of a movement than
a market.

We would rather think of ourselves as activists than as consumers, but
we are consumers all the same, and we will have to consider the
challenge of AK Press, which is en route to becoming the Wal-Mart of
anarchism. If you really want to buy an AK Press book, don't waste your
money buying it new from AK Press. Although AK pretends to be
blackballed by distributors like Amazon.com, that's a flat-out lie. You
can even get new AK Press books cheaper there, such as _Chomsky on
Anarchism_ ($11.53 vs. $16.95), _Vision on Fire_ ($12.89 vs. $18.95),
and _Post Scarcity Anarchism_ ($14.78 vs. $18.95). Better yet, you can
get most of them in cheaper used or different (and better) editions. Or
soon can. For some reason, I can't imagine why, the market is glutted
with previously owned AK Press products. I daresay the Panther video
will soon be there at knock-down prices. (And if AK lies about something
so easily checked, why believe its claim to be an egalitarian
self-managed utopian collective where Kanaan takes his turn mopping the
floor and Crusty the bicycle messenger decides what to publish?)

Capitalism may be the only game in town "at the moment," but any number
can play. AK Press has laughed off principled criticism throughout its
16 years in the United States. It was imported intact from Scotland by
the monied bourgeois workerist Ramsey Kanaan, whose vision, not on fire,
merely occluded, remains consistent, in the sense that uncorrected
myopia and astigmatism remain consistent. The canny anarchist shopper
will not miss out on anything if she takes her business elsewhere.
Sooner or later AK's undisclosed inheritances and subsidies will run
out, even as its media stars fall dead, dying, or discredited. This
strategy has worked before -- against Black Rose Books, another
pseudo-anarchist publisher of overpriced leftist shoddy, which once had
hegemonic aspirations.

The smart money should be put on the post-leftist projects like _AJODA_
and C.A.L. Press, not forgetting, among others, _Green Anarchist_
(London) and _Green Anarchy_ (Eugene), not only as a matter of
principle, but as good business too, because, as I have written, with
the worldwide collapse of the left, anarchy is the only game in town, if
you play for keeps. Or even if you don't.
