---
title: Activism
author: Bordiga, Amadeo
date: 1952
description: "The following article Bordiga writes about \"an illness of the workers movement\" -- namely _activism_. Based on the [libcom.org article](https://libcom.org/library/activism-amadeo-bordiga), which in refers to the [Spanish translation](http://www.sinistra.net/lib/upt/intpap/pitu/pituccodas.html)."
...

It is necessary to insist on the word. Just like certain infections of
the blood, which cause a wide range of illnesses, not excepting those
which can be cured in the madhouse, activism is an illness of the
workers movement that requires continuous treatment.

Activism always claims to possess the correct understanding of the
circumstances of political struggle, and that it is "equal to the
situation", but it is incapable of engaging in a realistic evaluation of
the relations of force, enormously exaggerating the possibilities of the
subjective factors of the class struggle.

It is therefore natural that those affected by activism react to this
criticism by accusing their adversaries of underestimating the
subjective factors of the class struggle and of reducing historical
determinism to that automatic mechanism which is also the target of the
usual bourgeois critique of Marxism. That is why we said, in Point 2 of
Part IV of our "Fundamental Theses of the Party":

> ... \[t\]he capitalist mode of production expands and prevails in all
> countries, under its technical and social aspects, in a more or less
> continuous way. The alternatives of the clashing class forces are
> instead connected to the events of the general historical struggle, to
> the contrast that already existed when bourgeoisie \[began to\] rule
> \[over\] the feudal and precapitalistic classes, and to the
> evolutionary political process of the two historical rival classes,
> bourgeoisie and proletariat; being such a process marked by victories
> and defeats, by errors of tactical and strategical method.

This amounts to saying that we maintain that the stage of the resumption
of the revolutionary workers movement does not coincide only with the
impulses from the contradictions of the material, economic and social
development of bourgeois society, which can experience periods of
extremely serious crises, of violent conflicts, of political collapse,
without the workers movement as a result being radicalized and adopting
extreme revolutionary positions. That is, there is no automatic
mechanism in the field of the relations between the capitalist economy
and the revolutionary proletarian party.

It could be the case, as in our current situation, that the economic and
social world of the bourgeoisie is riddled with serious tremors that
produce violent conflicts, but without the revolutionary party obtaining
as a result any possibilities of expanding its activity, without the
masses subjected to the most atrocious exploitation and fratricidal
massacres being capable of unmasking the opportunist agents, who
implicate their fate with the disputes of imperialism, without the
counterrevolution loosening its iron grip on the ruled class, on the
masses of the dispossessed.

To say, "An objectively revolutionary situation exists, but the
subjective element of the class struggle, the class party, is
deficient", is wrong at every moment of the historical process; it is a
blatantly meaningless assertion, a patent absurdity.

It is true, however, that in every wave of struggle, even those that
pose the greatest threat to the existence of bourgeois rule, even when
it seems that everything (the machinery of state, the social hierarchy,
the bourgeois political apparatus, the trade unions, the propaganda
system) has come to a halt and is heading towards its end, to its
destruction, the situation will never be revolutionary, but will for all
intents and purposes be counterrevolutionary, if the revolutionary class
party is weak, underdeveloped and theoretically unstable.

A situation of profound crisis in bourgeois society is susceptible to
leading to a movement of revolutionary subversion when "... the 'lower
classes' do not want to live in the old way and the 'upper classes'
cannot carry on in the old way...." (Lenin, "Left-Wing Communism", An
Infantile Disorder), that is, when the ruling class can no longer
effectively operate its own mechanism of repression, and when "... a
majority of the workers ... fully realise that revolution is necessary".

Such a consciousness on the part of the workers can only be expressed in
the class party, which is in the last analysis the determinant factor of
the transformation of the bourgeois crisis into the revolutionary
catastrophe of all of society.

It is therefore necessary, in order to save society from the "mare
magnum" in which it has fallen, and for which purpose the ruling class
is incapable of offering any help, because it is incapable of
discovering the appropriate new forms for liberating the productive
forces and directing them towards new development, that there should be
a collective revolutionary organ of thought and of action that will
channel and illuminate the subversive will of the masses.

The "not wanting to live in the old way" of the masses, the will to
struggle, the impulse to act against the class enemy, presuppose, within
the ranks of the proletarian vanguard that is called upon to develop the
function of guide of the revolutionary masses, the crystallization of a
solid revolutionary theory.

In the party, consciousness precedes action, unlike what takes place
among the masses and at the level of the individual.

If, however, someone were to say that this is nothing new, nothing
really modern, and inquire whether we are trying to turn the
revolutionary party into a small circle of scholars, of theoretical
observers of social reality? Never. In Point 7 of Part IV of our 1951
"Fundamental Theses of the Party", we read:

> Although small in number and having but few \[connections\] with the
> proletarian masses, in fact jealously attached to its theoretical tasks,
> which are of prime importance, the Party, because of this true
> appreciation of its revolutionary duties in the present period, refuses
> to become a circle of thinkers or of those searching for new truths, of
> 'renovators' considering as insufficient the past truth, and absolutely
> refuses to be considered as such.

Nothing could be more clear!

The transformation of the bourgeois crisis into class war and revolution
presupposes the objective collapse of the social and political framework
of capitalism, but this is not even potentially possible if the great
mass of the workers is not won over to or influenced by the
revolutionary theory disseminated by the party, a theory that is not
improvised on the barricades. But will this theory perhaps be distilled
behind closed doors by scholarly labors without any connection to the
masses?

In response to this stupid accusation made by the fanatics of activism,
one may quite correctly respond that, the indefatigable and assiduous
labor of defense waged on behalf of the doctrinal and critical patrimony
of the movement, the everyday tasks of immunization of the movement
against the poisons of revisionism, the systematic explanation, in the
light of Marxism, of the most recent forms of organization of capitalist
production, the unmasking of the attempts on the part of opportunism to
present such "innovations" as anti-capitalist measures, etc., all of
this is struggle, the struggle against the class enemy, the struggle to
educate the revolutionary vanguard, it is, if you prefer, an active
struggle that is nonetheless not activism.

Do you seriously believe (while the whole gigantic bourgeois machine is
committed from morning to night, not so much, please note, in refuting
the revolutionary theory, as it is in demonstrating that socialist
demands can be realized against Marx and against Lenin, and when not
only political parties but also established governments swear that they
govern, that is, oppress, the masses, in the name of communism) that the
arduous and exhausting task of restoring the revolutionary Marxist
critique, is merely a theoretical undertaking?

Who would dare to deny that it is also a political labor, an active
struggle against the class enemy? Only he who is possessed by the demons
of activist action could think such a thing.

The movement, even if it is weak in terms of numbers of adherents, that
works on its newspapers, on its meetings, on holding factory
discussions, to free revolutionary theory from unprecedented
adulterations, from opportunist contaminations, thus performs a
revolutionary labor, a labor for the proletarian revolution.

By no means can it be said that we conceive the task of the party as a
"struggle of ideas".

Totalitarianism, State Capitalism, and the downfall of the socialist
revolution in Russia are not "ideas" against which we oppose our own
ideas: they are real historical phenomena, which have eviscerated the
proletarian movement by leading it onto the treacherous terrain of
anti-fascist partisan formations, the ranks of the fascists, the
national front, pacifism, etc.

Those who, even if they are few in number and far removed from the
limelight of "grand politics", carry out a labor of Marxist
interpretation of these real phenomena and a labor of confirmation of
Marxist predictions (and it seems to us that there has been no serious
examination of these problems outside of the fundamental positions
advocated in our Prometeo, and especially in the study, "Property and
Capital"), are nonetheless assuredly performing a revolutionary task,
because they are establishing from this point on the itinerary and the
starting point of the proletarian revolution.

The resumption of the revolutionary movement does not require, for its
realization, the crisis of the capitalist system as a potential
eventuality; the crisis in the capitalist mode of production is already
a reality, the bourgeoisie has experienced all the possible stages of
its historical career, State Capitalism and imperialism mark the extreme
limits of its evolution, but the fundamental contradictions of the
system persist and are becoming more acute. The crisis of capitalism has
not been transformed into the revolutionary crisis of society, into a
revolutionary class war, and the counterrevolution is still triumphant
even though capitalist chaos gets worse, because the workers movement is
still crushed under the weight of the defeats it suffered over the last
thirty years due to the strategic errors committed by the communist
parties of the Third International, errors that have led the proletariat
to look upon the weapons of the counterrevolution as its own weapons.

The resumption of the revolutionary movement is still nowhere in sight
because the bourgeoisie, putting into practice bold reforms in the
organization of production and of the State (State Capitalism,
totalitarianism, etc.), has delivered a shattering and disorienting
blow, sowing doubt and confusion, not against the theoretical and
critical foundations of Marxism, which remain intact and unaffected, but
rather against the capacity of the proletarian vanguards to apply those
Marxist principles precisely in the interpretation of the current stage
of bourgeois development.

In such conditions of theoretical disorientation, is the labor of
restoring Marxism against opportunist distortions merely a theoretical
task?

No, it is the substantial and committed active struggle against the
class enemy.

Ostentatious activism seeks to make the wheels of history turn with
Waltz steps, swinging its derriere to the electoral symphony.

It is an infantile disorder of communism, but it spreads marvelously
even in the sanitarium of politics, where the retirees of the workers
movement go to die.

Requiescant in pace ... and then as if by magic they mobilize like an
armored division, as soon as they are sent to conquer the factory nuclei
of our groups -- to count our members you really do not need an
electronic calculator -- and they claim, making you laugh, that these
chickens and ducks, the imperialist blocs, are identical in weight, form
and color, they are of equal strength, and with this sophistry they
exhaust their very fluid analysis of the situation, which they deny that
anyone else is capable of undertaking; and they finally give in to the
deadly temptation that the easy chairs of parliament or some government
ministry exercise over their sorry old behinds...

All the activist psalms end in electoral glory. Back in 1917, we saw the
sordid conclusion of the super-activism of social democracy: after
decades of activity entirely devoted to the conquest of parliamentary
seats, of mixed trade union commissions, and of political influence,
that had bathed them in an aura of unstoppable activism.

When the time came for the armed insurrection against capitalism,
however, it was seen that the only party to engage in that insurrection
was the party that had the least experience "working among the masses"
during the years of preparation, the one that more than any other had
worked to preserve Marxist theory. It was then seen that those who
possessed a solid theoretical training marched against the class enemy,
while those who had a "glorious" patrimony of struggles shamefully
choked on their own words and went over to the side of the enemy.

So we are familiar with the fanatics of activism. Compared to them,
carnival barkers are gentlemen. That is why we maintain that there is
only one way to avoid their contagion: the classic kick in the ass.
