---
title: Proletarian Dictatorship and Class Party
author: Bordiga, Amadeo
date: 1951
description: Published as "Dittatura proletaria e partito di classe" in Battaglia Comunista, issues 3-5, in 1951. Translated into English in Communist Program no. 2 in 1976. From <https://www.marxists.org/archive/bordiga/works/1951/class-party.htm>.
...

## 1

>Every class struggle is a political struggle (Marx).

A struggle which limits itself to obtaining a new distribution of
economic gains is not yet a political struggle because it is not
directed against the social structure of the production relations.

The disruption of the relations of production peculiar to a particular
social epoch and the overthrow of the rule of a certain social class is
the result of a long and often fluctuating political struggle. The key
to this struggle is the question of the state: the problem of "who has
power?" (Lenin).

The struggle of the modern proletariat manifests and extends itself as a
political struggle with the formation and the action of the **class
party**. The specific features of this party are to be found in the
following thesis: the complete development of the industrial capitalist
system and of bourgeois power which issued from the liberal and
democratic revolutions, not only does not historically exclude but
prepares and sharpens more and more the conflict of class interests and
its development into civil war, into armed struggle.

## 2

The communist party, as defined by this historical foresight and by this
program, accomplishes the following tasks as long as the bourgeoisie
maintains power:

a. it elaborates and propagates the theory of social development, of the
economic laws which characterise the present social system of production
relations, of class conflicts which arise from it, of the state and of
the revolution;

b. it assures the unity and historical persistence of the proletarian
organisation. **Unity** does not mean the material grouping of the
working class and seeming working class strata which, due to the very
fact of the dominance of the exploiting class, are tinder for the
influence of discordant political leaderships and methods of action. It
means instead the close international linking-up of the vanguard
elements who are fully orientated on the integral revolutionary line.
**Persistence** means the continuous claim of the unbroken dialectical
line which binds together the positions of critique and struggle
successively adopted by the movement during the course of changing
conditions;

c. it prepares well in advance for the class mobilisation and offensive
by appropriately employing every possible means of propaganda, agitation
and action, in all particular struggles triggered off by immediate
interests. This action culminates in the organisation of the illegal and
insurrectional apparatus for the conquest of power.

When general conditions and the degree of organisational, political and
tactical solidity of the class party reach a point where the general
struggle for power is unleashed, the party which has led the
revolutionary class to victory through the social war, leads it likewise
in the fundamental task of breaking and demolishing all the military and
administrative organs which compose the capitalist state. This
demolition also strikes at the network of organs, whatever they may be,
which pretend to represent the various opinions or interests through the
intermediary of bodies of delegates. The bourgeois class state must be
destroyed whether it presents itself as the mendacious interclassist
expression of the majority of citizens or as the more or less open
dictatorship wielded by a government apparatus which pretends to fulfil
a national, racial or social-popular mission; if this does not take
place, the revolution will be crushed.

## 3

In the phase which follows the dismantling of the apparatus of
capitalist domination, the task of the political party of the working
class is as vital as ever because the class struggle -- though
dialectically inverted -- continues.

Communist theory in regard to the state and the revolution is
characterised above all by the fact that it excludes all possibility of
adapting the legislative and executive mechanism of the bourgeois state
to the socialist transformation of the economy (the social-democratic
position). But it equally excludes the possibility of achieving by means
of a brief violent crisis a destruction of the state and a
transformation of the traditional economic relationships which the state
defended up to the last moment (the anarchist position). It also denies
that the constitution of a new productive organisation can be left to
the spontaneous and scattered activity of groups of producers shop by
shop or trade by trade (the syndicalist position).

Any social class whose power has been overthrown, even if it is by means
of terror, survives for a long time within the texture of the social
organism. Far from abandoning its hopes of revenge, it seeks to
politically reorganise itself and to re-establish its domination either
in a violent or disguised way. It has turned from a ruling class into a
defeated and dominated one, but it has not instantly disappeared.

The proletariat -- which in its turn will disappear as a class alongside
all other classes with the realisation of communism -- **organises
itself as a ruling class (the Manifesto)** in the first stage of the
post-capitalist epoch. And after the destruction of the old state, the
new proletarian state is the dictatorship of the proletariat.

The precondition for going beyond the capitalist system is the overthrow
of bourgeois power and the destruction of its state. The condition for
bringing about the deep and radical social transformation which has to
take place is a new proletarian state apparatus, capable of using force
and coercion just as all other historical states.

The presence of such an apparatus does not characterise communist
society but instead it characterises the stage of its construction. Once
this construction is secured, classes and class rule will no longer
exist. But the essential organ of class rule is the state -- and the
state can be nothing else. Therefore communists do not advocate the
proletarian state as a mystical creed, an **absolute** or an **ideal**
but as a dialectical tool, a class weapon that will slowly wither away
(Engels) through the very realisation of its functions; this will take
place gradually, through a long process, as the social organisation is
transformed from a system of coercion of men (as it has always been
since the dawn of history) into a comprehensive, scientifically built
network for the management of things and natural forces.

## 4

After the victory of the proletariat, the role of the state in
relationship to social classes and collective organisations exhibits
many fundamental differences as compared with its role in the history of
the regimes that spring from the bourgeois revolution.

a. Revolutionary bourgeois ideology, prior to its struggle and final
   victory, presented its future post-feudal state not as a class state
   but as a **peoples state** based on the abolition of every inequality
   before the law, which it presented to be sufficient to assure freedom
   and equality for all members of society.

   Proletarian theory openly asserts that its future state will be a
   class state, i.e. a tool wielded by **one** class as long as classes
   exist. The other classes will be excluded from the state and outlawed
   in fact as well as in principle. The working class having achieved
   power "will share it with no one" (Lenin).

b. After the bourgeois political victory and in keeping with a tenacious
   ideological campaign, constitutional charters or declarations of
   principles were solemnly proclaimed in the different countries as a
   basis and foundation of the state. They were considered as being
   immutable in time, a definitive expression of the at last discovered
   immanent rules of social life. From then on, the entire interplay of
   political forces was supposed to take place within the insuperable
   framework of these statutes.

   During the struggle against the existing regime, the proletarian
   state is not presented as a stable and fixed realisation of a set of
   rules governing the social relationships inferred from an idealistic
   research into the nature of man and society. During its lifetime the
   working class state will continually evolve up to the point that it
   finally withers away: the nature of social organisation, of human
   association, will radically change according to the development of
   technology and the forces of production, and man's nature will be
   equally subject to deep alterations always moving away more and more
   from the beast of burden and slave which he was. Anything such as a
   codified and permanent constitution to be proclaimed after the
   workers revolution is nonsense, it has no place in the communist
   program. Technically, it will be convenient to adopt written rules
   which however will in no way be intangible and will retain an
   "instrumental" and temporary character, putting aside the
   facetiousnesses about social ethics and natural law.

c. Having conquered and even crushed the feudal apparatus of power, the
   victorious capitalist class did not hesitate to use the force of the
   state to repress the attempts of counterrevolution and restoration.
   However the most resolute terroristic measures were justified as
   being directed not against the class enemies of capitalism but
   against the **betrayers** of the people, of the nation, of the
   country, and of civil society, all these hollow concepts being
   identified with the state itself and, as a matter of fact, with the
   government and the party in power.

   The victorious proletariat, by using its state in order to "crush the
   unavoidable and desperate resistance of the bourgeoisie" (Lenin) will
   strike at the old rulers and their last supporters every time they
   oppose, in a logical defence of their class interests, the measures
   intended to uproot economic privilege. These social elements will
   keep an estranged and passive position **vis-à-vis** the apparatus of
   power: whenever they try to free themselves from the passivity
   imposed upon them, material force will subdue them. They will share
   no "social contract", they will have no "legal or patriotic duty". As
   veritable social prisoners of war (as in fact were the former
   aristocrats and clergymen for the Jacobean bourgeoisie) they will
   have nothing to **betray** because they will not be requested to take
   any ridiculous oath of allegiance.

d. The historical glitter of the popular assemblies and democratic
   gatherings hardly disguised the fact that, at its birth, the
   bourgeois state formed armed bodies and a police force for the
   internal and external struggle against the old regime and quickly
   substituted the guillotine for the gallows. This executive apparatus
   was charged with the task of administering legal force both on the
   great historical level and against isolated violations of the rules
   of appropriation and exchange characteristic of the economy founded
   on private property. It acted in a perfectly natural manner against
   the first proletarian movements which threatened, even if only
   instinctively, the bourgeois form of production. The imposing reality
   of the new social dualism was hidden by the game of the "legislative"
   apparatus which claimed to be able to bring about the participation
   of all citizens and all the opinions of the various parties in the
   state and in the management of the state with a perfect equilibrium
   and within an atmosphere of social peace.

   The proletarian state, as an open class dictatorship, will dispose of
   all distinctions between the executive and legislative levels of
   power, both of which will be united in the same organs. The
   distinction between the legislative and executive is, in effect,
   characteristic of a regime which conceals and protects the
   dictatorship of one class under an external cloak which is
   multi-class and **multi-party.** "The Commune was a working, not a
   parliamentary body" (Marx).

e. The bourgeois state in its classical form -- in coherence with an
   individualist ideology which the theoretical fiction universally
   extends to all citizens and which is the mental reflection of the
   reality of an economy founded on the monopoly of private property by
   one class -- refused to allow any intermediate body other than
   elective constitutional assemblies to exist between the isolated
   individual subject and the legal state centre. Political clubs and
   parties that had been necessary during the instructional stage were
   tolerated by it by virtue of the demagogic assertion of free thought
   and on the condition that they exist as simple confessional groupings
   and electoral bureaux. In a later stage the reality of class
   repression forced the state to tolerate the association of economic
   interests, the labour unions, which it distrusted as a "state within
   the state". Finally, unions became a form of class solidarity adopted
   by the capitalists themselves for their own class interests and aims.
   Moreover, under the pretext of **legally recognising** the labour
   unions, the state undertook the task of absorbing and sterilising
   them, thus depriving them of any autonomy so as to prevent the
   revolutionary party from taking their leadership.

   Labour unions will still be present in the proletarian state in so
   far as there still remains employers or at least impersonal
   enterprises where the workers remain wage earners paid in money.
   Their function will be to protect the standard of living of the
   working class, their action being parallel on this point to that of
   the party and the state. Non-working class unions will be forbidden.
   Actually, on the question of distribution of income between the
   working class and the non-proletarian or semi-proletarian classes,
   the worker's situation could be threatened by considerations other
   than the superior needs of the general revolutionary struggle against
   international capitalism. But this possibility, which will long
   subsist, justifies the unions' secondary role in relation to the
   political communist party, the international revolutionary vanguard,
   which forms a unitary whole with the parties struggling in the still
   capitalist countries and as such leads the proletarian state.

   The proletarian state can only be "animated" by a single party and it
   would be senseless to require that this party organise in its ranks a
   statistical majority and be supported by such a majority in "popular
   elections" -- that old bourgeois trap. One of the historical
   possibilities is the existence of political parties composed in
   appearance by proletarians, but in reality influenced by
   counterrevolutionary traditions or by foreign capitalisms. This
   contradiction, the most dangerous of all, cannot be resolved through
   the recognition of formal rights nor through the process of voting
   within the framework of an abstract "class democracy". This too will
   be a crisis to be liquidated in terms of relationships of force.
   There is no statistical contrivance which can ensure a satisfactory
   revolutionary solution; this will depend solely upon the degree of
   solidity and clarity reached by the revolutionary communist movement
   throughout the world. A century ago in the West, and fifty years ago
   in the Czarist Empire, Marxists rightly argued against the
   simple-minded democrats that the capitalists and proprietors are a
   minority, and therefore the only true government of the majority is
   the government of the working class. If the word democracy means
   power of the majority, the democrats should stand on our class side.
   But this word both in its literal sense ("power of the people") as
   well as in the dirty use that is more and more being made of it,
   means "power belonging not to one but to all classes". For this
   historical reason, just as we reject "bourgeois democracy" and
   "democracy in general" (as Lenin also did), we must politically and
   theoretically exclude, as a contradiction in terms, "class democracy"
   and "workers' democracy".

   The dictatorship advocated by marxism is necessary because it cannot
   be unanimously accepted and furthermore it will not have the naiveté
   to abdicate for lack of having a majority of votes, if such a thing
   were ascertainable. Precisely because it declares this it will not
   run the risk of being confused with a dictatorship of men or groups
   of men who take control of the government and substitute themselves
   for the working class. The revolution requires a dictatorship,
   because it would be ridiculous to subordinate the revolution to a
   100% acceptance or a 51% majority. Wherever these figures are
   displayed, it means that the revolution has been betrayed.

   In conclusion the communist party will rule alone, and will never
   give up power without a physical struggle. This bold declaration of
   not yielding to the deception of figures and of not making use of
   them will aid the struggle against revolutionary degeneration.

   In the higher stage of communism -- a stage which does not know
   commodity production, money nor nations and which will also witness
   the death of the state -- labour unions will be deprived of their
   "reason to be". The party as an organisation for combat will be
   necessary as long as the remnants of capitalism survive in the world.
   Moreover, it may always have the task of being the depository and
   propagator of social doctrine, which gives a general vision of the
   development of relationships between human society and material
   nature.

## 5

The marxist conception, that of substituting parliamentary assemblies
with working bodies, does not lead us back into "economic democracy"
either, i.e. into a system which would adapt the state organs to the
workplaces, to the productive or commercial units, etc., while excluding
from any representative function the remaining employers and the
individuals still owning property. The elimination of the employer and
the proprietor only defines half of socialism; the other half, the most
significant one, consists of the elimination of **capitalist economic
anarchy** (Marx). As the new socialist organisation emerges and develops
with the party and the revolutionary state in the foreground, it will
not limit itself to striking only the former employers and their
flunkies but above all it will redistribute the social tasks and
responsibilities of individuals in quite a new and original way.

Therefore the network of enterprises and services such as they have been
inherited from capitalism will not be taken as the basis of an apparatus
of so-called "sovereignty", that is of the delegation of powers within
the state and up to the level of its central bodies. It is precisely the
presence of the single-class state and of the solidly and qualitatively
unitary and homogeneous party which offers the maximum of favourable
conditions for a reshaping of social machinery that be driven as little
as possible by the pressures of the limited interests of small groups
and as much as possible by general data and by their scientific study in
the interests of the collective welfare. The changes in the productive
mechanism will be enormous; let us only think of the program for
reversing the relationships between town and country, on which Marx and
Engels insisted so much and which is the exact antithesis to present
trends in all countries.

Therefore, the network modelled after the work place is an inadequate
expression which repeats the old Proudhonist and Lassallean positions
that Marxism long ago rejected and surpassed.

## 6

The definition of the type of links between the organs of the class
state and its base depends first of all upon the results of historical
dialectics and cannot be deduced from "eternal principles", from
"natural law", or from a sacred and inviolable constitutional charter.
Any further details in this regard would be mere utopia. There is not a
grain of utopianism in Marx, Engels stated. The very idea of the famous
delegation of power by the isolated individual (elector) thanks to a
platonic act emanating from his freedom of opinion must be left to the
foggy realms of metaphysics; opinions in actuality are but a reflection
of material conditions and social forms, and power consists of the
intervention of physical force.

The negative characterisation of the proletarian dictatorship is clearly
defined: the bourgeois and semi-bourgeois will no longer have political
rights, they will be prevented by force from gathering in groups of
common interests or in associations for political agitation; they will
never be allowed to vote, elect, or delegate others to any post or
function whatsoever. But even the relationship between the worker -- a
recognised and active member of the class in power -- and the state
apparatus will no longer retain that fictitious and deceitful
characteristic of a **delegation** of power, of a representation through
the intermediary of a **deputy**, an election ticket, or by a party.
Delegation means in effect the renunciation to the possibility of direct
action. The pretended "sovereignty" of the democratic right is but an
abdication, and in most cases it is an abdication in favour of a
scoundrel.

The working members of society will be grouped into local territorial
organs according to their place of residence, and in certain cases
according to the displacements imposed by their participation in a
productive mechanism in full transformation. Thanks to their
uninterrupted and continuous action, the participation of all active
social elements in the mechanism of the state apparatus, and therefore
in the management and exercise of class power, will be assured. To
sketch these mechanisms is impossible before the class relationships
from which they will spring have been concretely realised.

## 7

The Paris Commune established as most important principles (see Marx,
Engels, Lenin) that its members and officials would be subject to recall
at any time, and that their salary would not exceed the wage of an
average worker. Any separation between the producers on the periphery
and the bureaucrats at the centre is thus eliminated by means of
systematic rotations. Civil service will cease being a **career** and
even a **profession**. No doubt, when put into practice, these controls
will create tremendous difficulties, but it was long ago that Lenin
expressed his contempt for all plans of revolutions to be carried out
**without difficulties!** The inevitable conflicts will not be
completely resolved by drawing up piles of rules and regulations: they
will constitute a historical and political problem and will express a
real relationship of forces. The Bolshevik revolution did not stop in
front of the Constituent Assembly but dispersed it. The workers',
peasants' and soldiers' councils had risen. This new type of state
organs which burst forth in the blaze of the social war (and were
already present in the revolution of 1905) extended from the village to
the entire country through a network of territorial units; their
formation did not answer to any of the prejudices about the "rights of
man" or the "universal, free, direct and secret" suffrage!

The communist party unleashes and wins the civil war, it occupies the
key positions in a military and social sense, it multiplies its means of
propaganda and agitation a thousand-fold through seizing buildings and
public establishments. And without losing time and without procedural
whims, it establishes the "armed bodies of workers" of which Lenin
spoke, the red guard, the revolutionary police. At the meetings of the
Soviets, it wins over a majority to the slogan: "All power to the
Soviets!". Is this majority a merely legal, or a coldly and plainly
numerical fact? Not at all! Should anyone -- be he a spy or a
well-intentioned but misled worker -- vote for the Soviet to renounce or
compromise the power conquered thanks to the blood of the proletarian
fighters, he will be kicked out by his comrades' rifle butts. And no one
will waste time with counting him in the "legal minority", that criminal
hypocrisy which the revolution can do without and which the
counterrevolution can only feed upon.

## 8

Historical facts different from those of Russia in 1917 (i.e. the recent
collapse of feudal despotism, a disastrous war, the role played by
opportunist leaders) could create, while remaining on the same
fundamental line, different practical forms of the basic network of the
state. From the time the proletarian movement left utopianism behind, it
has found its way and assured its success thanks not only to the real
experience of the present mode of production and the structure of the
present state, but also to the experience of the strategic mistakes of
the proletarian revolution, both on the battlefield of the "hot" civil
war where the Communards of 1871 gloriously fell and on the "cold" one
which was lost between 1917 and 1926 -- this last was the great battle
of Russia between Lenin's International and world capitalism supported
in the front lines by the miserable complicity of all the opportunists.

Communists have no codified constitutions to propose. They have a world
of lies and constitutions -- crystallised in the law and in the force of
the dominant class -- to crush. They know that only a revolutionary and
totalitarian apparatus of force and power, which excludes no means, will
be able to prevent the infamous relics of a barbarous epoch from rising
again -- only it will be able to prevent the monster of social
privilege, craving for revenge and servitude, from raising its head
again and hurling for the thousandth time its deceitful cry of
**Freedom!**
