---
title: Dialogue with Stalin
author: 
- Bordiga, Amadeo
- International Communist Party
date: 1950
description: "Part of the \"On the Thread of Time\" series, in which Bordiga/the ICP analyze and critique Stalin's \"Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR\". Based on the [Libri Incogniti](https://libriincogniti.wordpress.com/2017/12/13/amadeo-bordiga-dialogue-with-stalin/) Translation."
...

# First Day

By submitting another article, a good two years after his last article,
(that infamous text on linguistics[^1] which we had to deal with only
incidentally, but which would be worthy of detailed treatment;
nevertheless, quod differtur[^2]) about 50 pages long[^3], Stalin
responds to topics that have been presented in the last two years not
only in the series "Thread of Time", but also in the workshops on the
theory and programme of Marxism conducted by our Movement, and which
have been published in summarized or detailed form.

By which we do not mean that Stalin (or his secretariat, whose networks
span the globe) would have looked at this material and turned to us. We
must not believe that if we are real Marxists, the great historical
disputes required personified protagonists presenting themselves to the
astounded humanity -- as if an angel on his cloud were blowing into the
heavenly trumpet, and Dante's demon Barbariccia responds with a sound
that comes "de profundis", that is, from the depths, in the realest,
known to you, sense of the word[^4]. Or like the Christian Paladin and
the Saracen Sultan, who, before they draw their sparkling sabers,
introduce themselves in a loud voice, challenge each other with the list
of their ancestors and victorious tournaments and swear death to each
other.

That's just what was missing! On the one hand, the highest leader of the
world's largest state and the "communist" world proletariat, and on the
other hand, a nobody, a nothing.

In reality, the facts and material forces acting in the substructure
deterministically take up the discussion among themselves; and those who
then dictate the text or hack into the keys are, like those who give the
lecture, mere mechanisms, loudspeakers that passively convert the waves
into voices; and it is not said that a loudspeaker with a power of 2000
watts doesn't just produce the greatest nonsense.

It is therefore the same questions that emerge with regard to the
importance of both social conditions in today's Russia and international
relations at the economic, political and military levels; they impose
themselves just as much up there as they do down here, and they can only
be clarified if they are juxtaposed with the theory that grasps what has
already happened and is known, and if these questions are juxtaposed
with the history of this theory, which a very long time ago -- which
remains indelible -- was a common one.

So we know very well that Stalin's answer from the upper Kremlin stories
does not respond to our words and is not addressed to us. In order to
continue the debate, it is not even necessary for him to know our
theoretical organs[^5]. The things and forces -- whether large or small,
past, present or future -- remain the same, despite the whims of
symbolism. When the ancient philosophy wrote "sunt nomina rerum"
(literally: the names belong to things), she wanted to say that things
do not belong to the name. Translated into our language, this means: the
thing determines the name, not the other way round. You can continue to
dedicate 99% of your work to the name, portraits, epithets, lives and
graves of the great men: we will continue in the shadows, knowing that
soon the generation will come who will only smile at you, you famous men
of the great and very small calibre.

But the things between the lines in Stalin's writing are too important
for us to deny him the dialogue. For this reason, and not from a "á tout
seigneur tout honneur", we answer and expect the new appeal -- even if
it takes another two years, because we don't have a hurry (isn't it
true, ex-Marxist?).

## Tomorrow and Yesterday

All of the issues dealt with by Stalin are junctions of Marxism and
almost all of them are old nails, which we insistently demanded that
they be struck firmly before we presume to forge the future.

Of course, the majority of the political "viewers" distributed among the
various camps were not impressed by what Stalin had come back to in a
suggestive way, but by what he anticipated about an uncertain
future. Rushing onto it (because that's what is causing a stir) neither
friend nor foe understood a single word and presented strange and
exaggerated versions. The perspective -- that is their obsession. If the
observers are a bunch of fools, the machinist is no better off: He, who
starts the machine from his high prison, the highest offices of
governmental power, is currently in a position in which he is least
likely to be able to see and anticipate himself. So while all of the
impressive predictions cause excitement, we are concerned with what came
to him as a result of his retrospect (where he is not blocked by kippers
and a lot of whirlwind). In accordance with the existentialist credo,
everyone obeys the utterly dumb imperative: to talk, and the political
press provides entertainment just when it reveals the future and reports
about prophecies that a "great name" has lowered itself down to
pronounce. This time something unexpected came about: nothing of world
revolution, nothing of peace anymore, but also no "holy" war between
Russia and the rest of the world, but rather the inevitable war between
the capitalist states, which Russia -- for the time being -- is not
counted among. No news for Marxism, but also interesting for us who do
not have a particular fondness for political cinema, where the
cinema-goer doesn't care much whether what he sees is "really true" or
not. And in the dream world of the land of boundless opportunities,
luxurious restaurants, white telephones or the embrace of a flawless
supervenus made of celluloid, the spectator, the small employee or the
wage slave, returns contentedly to his hovel, where he approaches his
wife, who is embarrassed by the troubles of work, if he does not replace
her with a street beauty.

Well, instead of focusing on the starting point -- because that is
essential -- everyone has rushed to the end. One would have to put a
stop to this whole flock of half-idiots, who crumbled their heads over
the "after", and repulse the study of the "before"; that would be a lot
easier, but they can't think of that. Although one does not understand
the opened page, one does not resist the temptation to turn the page
further, in the hope of becoming wise after all from the previous one;
so it happens that the fool becomes more and more stupid.

In whatever shape the police commanding public peace, who the West is so
disgusted at  (where the means of dulling and standardizing the skulls
are ten times bigger and more repugnant): The definition of the social
stage reached and the running economic wheel-work in Russia is a
question that imposes itself -- leading to the following dilemma: Should
we continue to claim that the Russian economy is socialist, respectively
in the first stage of communism, or do we have to admit that despite
state industrialism, it is governed by the law of value inherent to
capitalism? Stalin *seems* to be attacking the last thesis and slowing
down economists and plant managers who are in a hurry to accept it. In
reality, he is preparing the confession[^6] that will soon follow and be
useful in the revolutionary sense as well. But the bullshit organized by
the "free world" reads from it the announcement of the transition to the
higher stage of full communism!

In order to bring the question to the fore, Stalin makes use of the
classical method. It would be easy to bet on a different colour that
would free him from any obligation to Marx and Lenin's school, but even
the bank itself could be blown up at this stage of the game. So instead
we start from ovo. Well, that is all right for us, since we have not bet
anything in history's roulette and learned from childhood on: our cause
is that of the proletariat, which has nothing to lose. Stalin explains
that a "textbook of the Marxist economy" is necessary (we are in 1952),
not only for the Soviet youth, but also for comrades in other
countries. So watch out, inexperienced and forgetful!

To include a chapter on Lenin and Stalin as the founders of the
political economy of socialism in such a book, even Stalin considers
superfluous because it would not bring anything new. That's right, if he
wants to say what is already known: they both didn't invent it, but
learned it -- Lenin always emphasized this.

Now that we are moving on to the field of strict terminology and
"school" wording, we must say in advance that we have a preprint of
Stalin's text, which the Stalinist newspapers themselves have taken from
a non-Russian press agency. We will look up in the full text as soon as
possible[^7].

## Commodities and Socialism

The reference to the basic elements of Marxist economics serves Stalin
to discuss the "system of commodity production in socialism". We have
explained in various texts (avoiding to say anything new) that every
system of commodity production is a non-socialist system; this is
exactly what we will reaffirm. If Stalin (Stalin, again and again
Stalin; we are dealing here with an article that could just as well have
come from a commission that could "in 100 years" have replaced or
discredited Stalin: for simplicity's sake, however, it is useful to use
names as symbols for complex events and contexts) had spoken of a system
of commodity production after the conquest of power by the proletariat,
this would not have been a monstrosity.

Referring to Engels, it seems that some "comrades" in Russia have said
that the maintenance of the system of commodity production (respectively
the commodity character of the products) after nationalization of the
means of production meant to maintain the capitalist economic
system. Stalin is certainly not the man who could theoretically prove
them wrong. If, however, they say that, in case they say it, one had
been able to eliminate commodity production and had only neglected or
forgotten it, then they should be mistaken.

But Stalin wants to prove that in a "socialist country" (a word
belonging to a questionable school) commodity production can exist, and
he draws upon the Marxist definitions and their clear, albeit perhaps
not entirely flawless, synthesis in Lenin's propaganda brochure[^8].

We have dealt several times with this subject, i. e. commodity
production, its emergence and rule, its clearly capitalist
character[^9]. According to Josef Stalin, precise plans can be drawn up
within commodity production without fearing that the terrible maelstrom
of the commodity world will draw the careless pilot into the middle of
the vortex and devour him in the capitalist abyss. However, his article
reveals (to whom reading it as a Marxist) that the vortexes are becoming
ever tighter and faster -- as predicted in theory.

The commodity, as Lenin reminds, is a thing with a double character: it
satisfies some human need and is exchangeable for another thing. And the
lines just before say simply: "In capitalist society, the production of
commodities is predominant, and Marx's analysis therefore begin with an
analysis of commodity."

The commodity thus possesses these two characteristics, and it does only
become a commodity when the second characteristic is added to the
first. The first, use value, is comprehensible even for flat
materialists like us, even for a child. It can be sensually experienced:
once licked on a piece of sugar, we stretch out our hands once more for
a sugar cube. But the road is long -- Marx flies over it in this great
paragraph -- until the sugar takes on an exchange value and one comes to
the delicate problem of Stalin, who is surprised that one established an
equivalence between grain and cotton.

Marx, Lenin, Stalin and we know very well what a hell dance is going on
as soon as exchange value appears. What did Lenin say? Where the
bourgeois economists saw relationships between things, Marx discovered
relationships between people! What do the three volumes of Marx's
"Capital" and the nearly 50 pages of Lenin's work prove? Very
simple. Where conventional economics sees perfect equivalence in
exchange, we no longer see exchangeable things, but people in a social
movement, we no longer see equivalence, but a scam. Karl Marx speaks of
a spook that gives the goods this strange and at first glance
incomprehensible character. Lenin, like any other Marxist, would have
grabbed the cold horror at the idea of being able to produce and
exchange goods while at the same time expelling their inherent devil
through exorcism. Does Stalin believe that? Or does he just want to tell
us that the devil is stronger than himself?

Just as the ghosts of medieval knights took revenge on Cromwell's
revolution by, in a bourgeois way, haunting the castles left to the
Landlords, so the goblin fetish of the commodity runs inexorably through
the halls of the Kremlin, and behind the rush of words sounding from the
speakers of the nineteenth party convention, one can hear gloating
laughter[^10].

When he wants to establish that commodity production and capitalism are
not absolutely identical, Stalin again makes use of our
method. Following the historical course backwards, he points out, like
Marx, that in certain forms of society (slave-keeper order, feudalism,
etc.) commodity production existed but "did not lead to
capitalism". This is indeed what Marx says in a passage of his
historical summary, but he has developed it quite differently and with a
completely different aim. The bourgeois economist claims that the system
of commodity production is the only possible mechanism to combine
production with consumption -- he knows all too well that as long as
this mechanism is in place, capital will continue to dominate the
world. Marx replies: We will see where the historical trend is heading;
first of all, I force you to acknowledge the irrefutable facts of the
past: it wasn't always commodity production that ensured that the
consumer was supplied with the product of labour. As examples, he
mentions the primitive societies based on collecting and direct
consumption, the ancient forms of the family and the tribe, the feudal
system of direct consumption within self-sufficient circles, in which
the products did not have to take on a commodity form. With the
development and complexity of technology and needs, sectors emerge that
are first supplied by barter trade and then by actual trade. Which
proves that commodity production, including private property, is neither
"natural" nor, as the bourgeois claims, permanent and eternal. The late
appearance of commodity production (the system of commodity production,
as Stalin says) and its existence on the sidelines of other modes of
production serve Marx to show that commodity production, after it has
become universal, just after the spread of the capitalist production
system, must go down with it.

It would take too long if we wanted to cite the Marxist passages
directed against Proudhon, Lassalle, Rodbertus and many others,
denouncing any attempt to reconcile commodity production with the
socialist emancipation of the proletariat.

For Lenin, this is the cornerstone of Marxism. It would be quite
difficult to reconcile it with Stalin's current thesis: "Why then, one
asks, cannot commodity production similarly serve our socialist society
for a certain period" or "Commodity production leads to capitalism only
if there is private ownership of the means of production, if labour
power appears in the market as a commodity which can be bought by the
capitalist and exploited in the process of production, and if,
consequently, the system of exploitation of wage workers by capitalists
exists in the country." This hypothesis is, of course, absurd; in the
Marxist analysis, any existence of a mass of commodities suggests that
reserve-less proletarians had to sell their labour-power. If in the past
there was commodity production limited to a few branches, it was not
because the labour-power was sold "voluntarily" as it is today, but
rather because it was squeezed by force of arms from enslaved prisoners
or serfs in personal dependency.

Do we have to quote the first two lines of "Capital" again? "The wealth
of those societies in which the capitalist mode of production prevails,
presents itself as 'an immense accumulation of commodities'".

## The Russian Economy

After the text has more or less skilfully demonstrated to show respect
for the origins of Marxism, it moves on to the question of today's
Russian economy. The task is to silence those who want to have
determined that the system of commodity production inevitably leads to
the restoration of capitalism -- and thus also us, who even more clearly
say: commodity production only survives in so far as we are within a
totally capitalist system.

In the famous Stalin pamphlet one finds these concessions regarding the
Russian economy: even if the large firms are socialized, the small and
medium-sized firms however aren't expropriated: on the contrary, this
would "be equal to a crime". According to the author, they should
transition into cooperative firms.

Currently there are two sectors of commodity production in Russia: on
the one hand the public, "nationally owned" production. In the
state-owned enterprises, the means of production and production itself,
thus also the products, are national property. How simplistic: in Italy,
the tobacco factories and accordingly their sold cigarettes are owned by
the state. Does this already qualify for the assertion that one is in a
phase of the "abolishment of the wage labour system" and the respective
workers weren't "forced" to sell their labour power? Surely not.

Let's move on to the other sector: agriculture. In the kolkhozes, says
the brochure, land and machines are state property, but the products of
labour don't belong to the state, but to the kolkhoz. And the kolkhoz
sheds only from them because they are commodities, which are
exchangeable for other commodities that one needs. There is no link
between the rural kolkhoz and the urban regions which is not based on
exchange. "Therefore commodity production and commodity circulation are
still such a necessity as they have been thirty years ago for example".

Let's put aside for a moment the argument about the remote possibility
of overcoming this situation. It is to be noted that what Lenin proposed
in 1922 is out of the question: "We wield the political power in our
hands, and we will persevere militarily, but in the economic domain we
need to fall back on the purely capitalist form of commodity
production." Corollary of this statement was: if we interrupt for a
certain time the erection of the socialist economy, we will get back at
it after the European revolution. Today's propositions are diametrically
opposed to this.

One doesn't even try anymore to make a case such as the following: in
the transition from capitalism to socialism certain sectors of
production for a while are still subjected to commodity production.

Instead, one simply says: everything is a commodity; there is no other
economic framework but that of commodity exchange and accordingly of the
buying of labour power, not even in state-owned, large firms. Indeed,
from where does the factory worker get his means of subsistence? The
kolkhoz sells them to him mediated by private merchants; preferably it
sells them to the state, from which it obtains tools, fertilizer etc.;
the worker then must procure the means of subsistence in the state-owned
stores for hard-earned rubles. Couldn't the state distribute the
products, of which it can dispose, directly to its workers? Surely not,
because the worker (especially the Russian one) doesn't consume
tractors, vehicles, locomotives, not to speak of cannons and machine
guns. And clothing and furniture are of course produced in the small-
and medium-sized firms untouched by the state.

The state therefore can give the workers which are dependent upon it
nothing but a monetary wage, with which they then buy what they want (a
bourgeois euphemism for: the little they can buy). That the
wage-distributing entrepreneur is the state, which presents itself as
the "ideal" or "legitimate" representative of the working class, doesn't
say the slightest, if it wasn't even able to begin distributing anything
quantitatively relevant outside the mechanism of commodity production.

## Anarchy and Despotism

Stalin approaches some Marxist goals, which we continuously brought back
from the past: lowering of the gap, respectively sublation of the
contradiction between town and country; overcoming of the social
division of labour; drastic reduction (to 5 or 6 hours as an immediate
measure) of the working day, as the only mean to abolish the separation
between manual and mental labour and to erase the leftovers of bourgeois
ideology.

At the assembly in July 1952 in Rome, we dealt with the topic of the
12th chapter of "Capital": "Separation of labour and factory", for
"factory" read "business". It was shown: to leave capitalism, along with
the system of commodity production, the social division of labour -- of
which Stalin also speaks -- and as well the technical, respectively
managerial division of labour, which leads to the brutalization of the
worker and which is the origin of factory despotism, must be
destroyed. The two axes of the bourgeois system are social anarchy and
factory despotism. In Stalin, we can at least recognize the struggle to
fight against the former, whereas he remains silent about the
latter. But nothing in contemporary Russia is moving towards the
direction of the programmatic goals, neither those named by Stalin, nor
those of which nobody talks anyway.

If a -- today as tomorrow insurmountable -- barrier is lowered down
between state firm and kolkhoz, which only lifts to allow for business
"for mutual gain" to be made, what should bring town and country closer
together, what should free the worker from the necessity to sell too
many working hours for little money, respectively a few means of
subsistence and give him therefore the possibility of disputing the
scientific and cultural monopoly of capitalist tradition?

We therefore not only haven't got the first phase of socialism in front
of us, but also not even a total state capitalism, that means an
economy, in which -- even though all products are commodities and
circulate for money -- the state disposes of every product; so, a form
in which the state can centrally determine all proportions of
equivalence, including labour power. Such a state as well couldn't be
controlled nor conquered economically/politically by the working class
and would function in service of the anonymous and hidden operating
capital. But Russia is far away from that anyways: all that is there, is
the after the anti-feudal revolution arisen state
industrialism[^11]. Thanks to public investment in extensive public
projects, this system allowed for the quick development and dispersion
of industry and of capitalism, accelerated the bourgeois transformation
of agriculture and agricultural law. But the "collectivist economic"
agricultural businesses have nothing public, much less socialist in
them: they're on the level of cooperatives, just as they existed around
the turn of the century in the Italian Padan Plain and which produced on
leased or (often out of state ownership) bought land. The only
difference is that in the kolkhoz without a doubt there's a hundred
times more thefts than in those modest, but honest cooperatives -- but
Stalin, high up in the Kremlin, is not going to hear of that.

The industrial state must negotiate the buying of the means of
consumption on the "free market", which means that wage and labour time
are on the same level as in the capitalist private industry. Concerning
the economic development, it is to be said that for example America is
closer to complete state capitalism than Russia: after all the Russian
worker has to spend three fifths of his wage on agrarian products,
whereas the American worker spends the same ratio on industrial
products; he even gets the food delivered by the industry for the most
part in *cans* -- the poor devil.

## State and Retreat

At this point, there is another important question to be posed. The
relationship between agriculture and industry stays on an entirely
bourgeois level, no matter how substantial the inexorable progress of
industry. Stalin confesses, that not even future interventions into this
relation are to be expected, which would amount to more statism, much
less socialism.

This drawback also hides subtly behind the Marxist doctrine. What can we
do? Expropriate the kolkhozes brutally? For that we would need to make
use of the state power. And precisely here Stalin reintroduces the
withering away of the state, which he wanted to do away with on another
occasion, whereas he back then put a mask on, as if he wanted to say:
"You're only making fun, right guys?".

Of course, the assumption, that a worker's state could make a drawback
is indefensible -- when the entire agrarian sector is still commodity
based and privately organized. Because even if one would for a moment
accept the earlier contested thesis of the existence of commodity
production under socialism, it would be inseparable from the other
thesis: If commodity production isn't abolished everywhere, the
withering away of the state cannot be on the table.

Ultimately, we can only reason that the fundamental relation between
town and country (that during the dramatic development of thousands of
years freed itself from Asiatic and feudal forms) is solved there
exactly as capitalism plans and and what is expressed by the classical,
in bourgeois countries used words: To regulate the commodity exchange
between industry- and agricultural production rationally. This system
"requires thus a gigantic increase" of industrial production \[Stalin,
p. 95\]. Well then! If one disregards for a moment the fantasized
correct state -- a virtually "liberal" solution.

---

The question of the relation between agriculture and industry was
answered by the confession of the impotence to do anything but to
industrialize and to increase production, thus at the expense of the
workers. At this point, as already mentioned, there are the other two
great questions of the relation between state and business and among
businesses to be posed.

For Stalin, it presented itself like this: Does the law of value which
applies in capitalist production also exist in Russia? Does it also
apply for the state owned, large scale industry? This law determines,
that commodity exchange always follows equivalents: the appearance of
"freedom, equality and Bentham[^12]", which Marx destroyed, when he
showed that capitalism doesn't produce for the product, but for
profit. Command and control of the economic laws -- between those two
cliffs Stalin's "manifesto" maneuvers  back and forth and thus confirms
our thesis: In its most powerful form, capital subordinates itself to
the state, even when the state appears as the judicial sole owner of all
businesses.

On the second day, oh Scheherazade[^13], we will tell you of that, and
on the third day of the world market and war.

# Second Day

To precisely define the economy of contemporary Russia, we on the first
day of this dispute with Stalin's "answers" to our Marxist enquiries and
demonstrations mainly concerned ourselves emphasizing the
incommensurateness of commodity production and socialist economy. For
us, every system of commodity production in the modern world, a world of
associated labour, that is the aggregation of workers in production
plants, is defined as capitalist economy.

Let's now get to the question of the stages of socialist economy
(better: of socialist organization) and the distinction between lower
and higher stage of communism. To get away from the definition of
"immovable" and thus abstract systems and to put ourselves on the ground
of history, let's anticipate the central assertion of our doctrine: The
transition from capitalist to socialist economy doesn't happen in an
instant, but in a long process. We must thus assume, that for a
relatively long period there might be a coexistence of private and
collective sectors, of capitalist (and precapitalist) and socialist
realms. But we specify already that every realm, every sector, in which
commodities (including human labour power) circulate, are bought and
sold, is capitalist economy.

In the now distributed and in the meantime for us available scripture,
Stalin explains, that in the Russian agricultural sector commodity
production, respectively market economy exists (he further confirms the
existence of private economy, insofar as some means of production are in
private ownership as well), and he asserts that the industrial sector
(large scale industry) only produces commodities when goods for
consumption, but not when goods for production are
produced. Nevertheless he acts convinced, to not only be able to call
the sector of large scale industry, but the entire Russian economy
socialist, even though commodity production continues to prevail on a
big basis.

We addressed all this already in our texts, which dealt with the basic
documents of Marxism and the data of general economic history; today we
must move over to the question of the "economic laws", particularly "the
law of value".

## Certainties and uncertainties

Let's first remark: To meet the objections of Russian economists, that
invoke Engels to clarify that one can only leave capitalism if one
leaves commodity production, that capitalism is only overcome where
commodity production is overcome, Stalin only tries to read something
different out of a single paragraph in "Anti-Dühring" than what is
written there, whereas in the entire section "Socialism: Theoretical --
Production -- Distribution" Engels develops the addressed thesis -- and
very well-tailored for the Stalinist Dühring as well.

The paragraph reads: "With the seizing of the means of production by
society production of commodities is done away with, and,
simultaneously, the mastery of the product over the producer.".

Engels, remarks Stalin, didn't specify whether this concerns "all" or
only "a part" of the means of production. The distinction might, or
might not, seem very smart to one, from a theoretical point of view
however, it is wrong. Only, so Stalin further, the social seizing of
"all" means of production (Small and large scale industry, agriculture)
allows to "get rid" of the system of commodity production. Caramba!

In 1919 we bestirred ourselves together with Lenin (and Stalin) until
exhaustion, to force down the stubborn social democrats' and anarchists'
throats, that the means of production cannot be conquered on a single
day and by coup, and that precisely because of this -- and only because
of this -- the terror, the dictatorship, is necessary. And today, new
textbooks on political economy shall be published, that the absurdity,
that all products lose their character as commodities on the day on
which a functionary ascended to the Kremlin presents some Stalin with a
decree for signature, which expropriates the last chicken of the last
member of the last kolkhoz, is accepted.

In another paragraph, Engels talks about the seizing of all means of
production, which is why we now need to hear that the above cited
"formula of Engels cannot be described as entirely clear and exact"
\[Stalin, p. 11\].

By the beard of the prophet Abraham, that's strong stuff! Friedrich
Engels, of all people, the contemplative, calm, sharply defining,
crystal clear Friedrich, master of the patience to get a holed ship
going again and to straighten the historical doctrine; whose modesty and
prowess are unreachable (behind the impetuous Marx, who occasionally
might seem difficult to understand because of his far sight and
excellent language, and because of this strength maybe -- maybe -- might
be easier to distort); Engels, whose language is so fluid, and who by
talent and because of scientific discipline doesn't omit a necessary
word, nor adds an unnecessary one: of all people, one accuses him of a
lack of precision and clarity!

One must put things into their place: We are not in the organizational
office or in the agitation committee here, where you, ex-comrade Josef,
might be able to persuade yourself to be able to have something on
Engels. We are in the school of principles here. Where is the talk of
the seizure of all means of production? Maybe there, where the talk is
of commodities? Never. "Since the historical appearance of the
capitalist mode of production, the appropriation by society of all the
means of production has often been dreamed of, more or less vaguely, by
individuals, as well as by sects, as the ideal of the future.", reminds
us Engels. Precisely because for us it is not a thing of an ideal, but
of science, we cannot let a "more or less" clear, respectively unclear,
pass.

And when Engels, a few pages on, talks about society as mistress of all
means of production, then precisely in the passage, where he deals with
the entirety of demands: because only through this upheaval will the
emancipation of all individuals be achieved. Engels then shows, that the
sublation of the divide between town and country, manual and mental
labour, the social and professional division of labour was already
demanded by the utopians, particularly the keen Fourier and Owen (Stalin
indeed admits the first two divides, but claims, again theoretically
being gravely in the wrong: "This problem wasn't dealt with by the
classics of Marxism" \[Stalin, p.28\]): In both, population should
dispense across the country in groups of 1600 to 300, and mental and
manual labour are in constant shift. Engels charges those justified and
exalted demands only with one deficiency: the missing evidence (that
only Marxism provided) of their realization given the basis of the then
achieved and now excessive development of the productive
forces. Anticipating the highest revolutionary victory, Engels describes
an "organization of production", in which regarding productive labour
"burden becomes passion" and reminds us of the closed reasoning in the
12th Chapter of the first volume of "Capital" about the destruction of
the social division of labour and the human crippling factory
despotism. Neither Stalin nor Malenkov[^14] can boast to have made a
step in that direction. On the contrary: Stachanovism and
sturmovchina[^15] (dialectical reactions of poor, crippled victims to
the despotism in the haloed "sweatshops") are the proof, that one is
marching into the direction of the all stifling capitalism.

Stalin is trivializing those postulates, by reducing them to the
"disappearance of the contradiction of interest" between industry and
agriculture, between physically working people and the "leading
personnel". But something completely else is the point: The abolition of
a social organization, in which the allocation of people onto these
sectors and functions adheres to a strict division of labour.

Where have these passages of Engels ever allowed to say, that it
wouldn't be necessary for the entire vast building of the future
society, to destroy with every turn of the shovel the production of
commodities, to shovel up post by post of its reeking trenches?

We of course here cannot recite for Stalin all the chapters, but as
usual we cite the essential, because clear and unequivocal paragraphs,
which we accept without restrictions and not say cum grano salis \[with
a grain of salt\]. We know by old experience, how such grains of salt
have turned into mountains.

Engels: "The 'exchange of labour for labour on the principle of equal
valuation', in so far as it has any meaning, that is to say, the mutual
exchangeability of products of equal social labour, hence the law of
value, is the fundamental law of precisely commodity production, hence
also of its highest form, capitalist production.". It follows the famous
passage in which Dühring is reproached for, just as Proudhon, imagining
the future society as a market economy and not seeing, how he is thus
describing a capitalist economy. An "imaginary society", Engels says. At
least Stalin in his not to be despised scripture describes an actually
existing capitalist economy.

Marx: "Let us now picture to ourselves, by way of change, a community of
free individuals, carrying on their work with the means of production in
common, in which the labour power of all the different individuals is
consciously applied as the combined labour power of the
community.". This sentence alone is a revolutionary programme. With the
future achievement of this form of social organization, succinctly
labelled as communism, one returns to the Robinson with which one
started. What does that mean? Robinson's product was no commodity, but
an object of use, because there was -- of course -- no exchange. With
eagle wings we fly over the entire history of humanity: "All the
characteristics of Robinson's labour are here \["here" means: in the
communist association\] repeated, but with this difference, that they
are social, instead of individual.". The only necessary textbook to
learn to read is the primer! And one reads: The product of labour ceases
to be a commodity, when society is socialist. Then Marx arrives at the
juxtaposition of this "state of things" (of socialism) with commodity
production, and shows, that one is the dialectical, utter, relentless
and irreconcilable opposite of the other.

## Society and homeland

Before we however get to the question of economic laws, we must remark a
great deal to the Stalinist version of the socialist programme put
forward by Engels in the "Anti-Dühring". This is even more important, as
Stalin (in refutation of various Russian economists) refrains here from
distortions and revisions of the classical texts and cites whole
passages, while he in this subject utters a vehement "party
condemnation" against any violation of orthodoxy.

Again and again Engels talks in his fundamental work about the seizure
of the means of production by society, and first and foremost (we
underline that a hundred times) about the seizure of the products --
products, which today rule over the producer and even the consumer, so
that from our point of view, capitalism can be described as a system,
which not only negates the producers' disposal of the means of
production, but rather the disposal of the products.

In the Muscovite paraphrase the "society" disappears, instead the talk
is about the transfer of the means of production to the state, the
nation and (when in the terminal element of the events the point is to
inflame passions and invoke the ritual ovations) to the people, the
socialist homeland!

If one gives the summary of the Stalinist narrative, not without denying
it the merit of brutal honesty, the seizure of the means of production
regarding land and the large equipment goods of agriculture proves to be
a mere legal question, because any of its practical consequences is
already contained within the statutes of Artel[^16] or the last Soviet
constitution (which shall be revised). One must see, that those solemn
statements about the rightful property have nothing to do with the
economic disposal of agrarian products, which are divided between the
kolkhozes and the single kolkohzniki. Factually true is the seizure
through the state only in the large-scale industry, because the state
only here disposes of products, and those it sells, as far as they are
products of consumption, again. In the small and medium sized businesses
and in the commercial enterprises however, there is no seizure of
products, not even of the means of production, by the state. This also
applies to the micro-equipment of the state-sponsored family and parcel
economy. Despite the existence of huge factories and giant public
construction projects, the self-proclaimed socialist and Soviet republic
leads and controls not a lot; and not much was truly socialized and
nationalized. The meaning of state property in relation to the entire
economy is probably bigger in some bourgeois states.

Who then, which institution, which power, wields what was wrested from
the private hand after the revolution? The people, the nation, the
homeland? Never have Engels and Marx used those words. The
transformation of private property into state property, "does not do
away with the capitalistic nature of the productive forces", Engels
remarks.

Only when society disposes of the products, only then it is clear, that
it has overcome the class antagonisms and has become a classless
society. But as long as there are classes, society will be organized by
that "class solely", which must sublate all classes, and as a
dialectical consequence itself. Here, it is tied on the masterful
illustration of the theory of the state, which emerged already in 1847:
"The proletariat seizes the state power and initially turns the means of
production into state property." (Engels is citing Marx here). "But, in
doing this, it abolishes itself as proletariat, abolishes all class
distinction and class antagonisms, abolishes also the state as
state.". Only then, and only on this royal road it is society, which
arises as the acting factor and finally disposes of the productive
forces, all products, as well as resources.

But the people, what the heck is that? A mishmash of different classes,
an "integral" of expropriators and slaves, of political or business
professionals and the starving, respectively the oppressed. The "people"
we already left to the associations for freedom and democracy, freedom
and progress, before 1848. With its notorious "majorities", the people
is not the subject of economic planning, but merely an object of
expropriation and fraud.

And the nation? As a necessity and perquisite for the emergence of
capitalism it expresses the same mixture of social classes, not like
"people" in the stale, legal and philosophic sense, but on a
geographical, ethnographical and linguistic level. The "nation" as well
doesn't seize anything: In famous passages Marx ridiculed the
expressions "national wealth" and "national income" (which plays an
important role in Stalin's analysis of Russia) and showed, that the
nation enriches itself precisely when the worker is screwed.

If the bourgeois revolutions and the assertion of modern industry, which
extruded feudalism in Europe and various other systems in the rest of
the world, didn't carry out in the name of the bourgeoisie and capital,
but precisely in the name of the people and nations, if this was in the
Marxist conception a revolutionary and necessary transition, then we can
deduce, how consistently the Muscovite coincide with that: the jettison
of Marxist political economy and the renunciation of the proletarian,
revolutionary and internationalist "category" society (a category that
is used in classic texts), as well as an orientation towards the
political categories immanent in bourgeois ideology and propaganda:
people's democracy and national independence.

One does not need to be surprised then, when 26 years later the
outrageous slogan is repeated, which we Marxists burned all bridges
with: to "pick up"[^17] the banner of the bourgeoisie. The banner, which
in the days of a Cromwell, Washington, Robespierre or Garibaldi was
upheld and then thrown overboard; the revolution in its march however,
will leave it in the mud -- because their lies and myths of peoples,
nations and homelands it counterposes with the socialist society.

## Law and theory

In the Muscovite debate, the comparison between the laws of the Russian
economy and the established laws of bourgeois economy by Marxism also
came up. The namely text fights dialectically on two fronts. Some say:
"If our economy was already socialist, we would not need to follow
deterministically the tracks of certain economic processes, but could
set the course differently: e.g. by the nationalization of the
kolkhozes, the abolition of commodity exchange and monetary economy. If
you show us, that this is impossible, then let's deduce from that, that
we live in a society, whose economy is entirely capitalist. What does it
help to fool ourselves?" In contrast to that, others want to shelve
criteria that distinguish socialism in Marxism; Stalin bestirs to answer
both. Those naive researchers are of course no active "political"
elements: otherwise it would have been easy to take them out by a
purge. We are only dealing with "technicians" and experts of the
apparatus of production, through whose mediation the central government
learns, whether the huge machinery runs smoothly or has stalled; and
when they were right, it would not help to silence them: the crisis
would show either way. The difficulties, which are surfacing today, or
put more accurately, come to light, are not of academic, critical or
even "parliamentary" nature -- to move beyond such stitches, no "great
man" needs to come, a small political parvenu could handle that. The
difficulties on the other hand are real, material, they lie within the
things, not in the heads.

For answering of the objections, the central government has to insist on
two things: first, that in a socialist society, people also have to obey
to economic laws which cannot be suspended. Second, that those laws --
in whatever way they will differ in the future full communism all and
sundry from the laws of capitalism -- in the socialist phase partly
correspond to the laws of capitalist production and distribution, partly
differ from them. And if the apparently insurmountable laws are settled
then, one must not ignore them by the punishment of demise and one
particularly must not contravene them. So far Stalin.

Then a special, albeit essential question arises: is the law of value
part of those laws which continue to persist in the Russian economy? And
if yes, isn't every mechanism that adheres to the law of value pure
capitalism? Stalin replies to the first question: Yes, the law of value
is in effect over here, though not everywhere. And to the second: No,
not every economy in which the law of value operates is capitalist.

In the entire, solemnly presented theoretical "essay", the structure
seems to be very fragmented and most notably it suits the book of the
enemies of Marxism. Those, who employ "philosophical" weapons, will have
an easy job, because the effects of the laws of nature and the effects
of the economic laws on the human species are equated; while those, who
prefer the weapon of "economy" and who have been waiting for a century
for a revenge against Marx, can believe to have made it: "The laws of
economic profitability and competition of social interests, like we
understand them, you will never be able to evade".

One has to distinguish between theory, law and programme. In a certain
passage the following sentence slips out of Stalin's mouth: "Marx, he,
as we know, did not like \[!\] to digress from his investigation of the
laws of capitalist production" \[Stalin, p. 82\].

We already showed at the last assembly in September 1952 in Milan, that
Marx's aim didn't lie in the sterile description of the capitalist
"status quo", but that from every row the demand and the programme of
the destruction of capitalism stares one in the face. Our point wasn't
only to destroy the old and stale opportunist legend, but to show the
entire polemical and militant nature intrinsic to Marx's work. That's
why Marx doesn't lose himself within the description of capitalism, or
respective capitalisms, but instead he describes a capitalist system, an
abstract, yes, non-existent, yes, typical capitalism, which nevertheless
entirely corresponds to the glorifying theses of the bourgeois
economists. Important is solely the clash of both positions (a clash of
classes and parties, not a mundane dispute between intellectuals), of
which one wants to prove the permanence, the eternity of capitalist
machinery, while the other proves its coming death. In this light the
revolutionary Marx cared to admit, that the clockwork, perfectly
centered and by the freedom of competition, and the right of every
individual, to produce and consume by the same rules, is well
lubricated. In the actual history of capital it has never been like
that, it is not like that, it never will be like that, meaning: the
concrete reality would for our reasoning be much more convenient. Even
better. If it, to make it short, would have worked out for capitalism,
to persevere another century with idyllic ease, the Marxian reasoning
would have suffered shipwreck. But it continues to shine with full
force, as capitalism continues, but only by monopolization, suppression,
dictatorship and massacre; and its economic development precisely
follows the results of the analysis of the pure type: confirmation of
our doctrine, refutation of the lackeys of capital.

In this sense, Marx has dedicated his whole life to the description of
socialism, of communism; had it concerned only the description of
capitalism, he wouldn't have given a damn about it.

Marx investigated and developed the "economic laws" of capitalism
indeed, but the method, in which he did this, indicates the system of
socialist characteristics entirely and in dialectical contradiction to
them. So, does socialism adhere to those laws? Are they others? And if
yes, which?

Just a moment! In the center of the Marxist work we put the programme,
as a moment that follows a sober examination. "The philosophers have
only interpreted the world, in various ways; the point is to change it",
"Theses on Feuerbach", and every educated dork adds: "youth" theses. But
before the programme, and even before the depiction of the discovered
laws, the doctrine as a whole, the system of "theories", has to be
determined.

Some of those theories Marx has found ready-made at his adversaries,
e.g. Ricardo's value theory, and the theory of surplus value as
well. Those theories (we don't want to claim Stalin never knew of them)
are something different from the by Marx thoroughly treated "law of
value", respectively "law of surplus value", which we here, to not
confuse the less experienced among us, rather would like to call "law of
the exchange of equivalents" and "law of the relation between the rate
of surplus value and the rate of profit".

It is important, to initially clarify the distinction between theory and
law, a distinction, which also applies in science. Theory is the
depiction of real processes and their relations, to ease the general
understanding on a certain area -- prediction and modification of those
procedures only follow that. Law is the precise expression of a certain
relation between multiple, particularly between two series of material
circumstances: a relation, whose validity is verifiable at any point and
which allows to calculate unknown proportions (no matter, you
philosophers, if it is about future, part or present ones. For example I
am, with a well discovered law, able to determine, how high the sea
level was a thousand years ago; the only difference, that I cannot test,
is, how much more you stink to high heaven today.). Theory is something
universal, the law something strictly differentiated and
particular. Theory is generally qualitative and serves the definition of
certain magnitudes and essences. The law is quantitative and aims at
their measurement.

An example from physics: in the history of optics, two theories of light
have superseded each other with varying success. According to the
particle theory, the transmission of light consists of the movement of
miniscule "corpuscles", while the wave theory explains this by the
oscillation of a permanent medium. Now the easiest law of optics, the
law of reflection, says that the ray that hits a mirror forms an angle
of incidence that is equal to the angle of reflection. A thousand times
this law is confirmed: the skirt chaser precisely knows where he must
stand, when he wants to observe the beautiful neighbor that is grooming
herself in front of the mirror: in fact, the law is compatible with both
theories. It were different appearances and laws that decided the
choice.

Now, according to Stalin's text, the "law of the exchange of
equivalents" is said to be compatible both with his "theory": "In
socialist economy there are forms of commodity production", as well as
with our theory that says: "If commodity production and mass production
exist, then that's capitalism". The law is easily tested: One drives to
Russia and one will see, that the exchange happens at determined prices
with rubles, like on any arbitrary market: thus, the law of the exchange
between equivalents prevails. To see now, which theory is the correct
one, it's a bit more difficult. We, for our part, deduce: In Russia one
finds oneself within the pure and real capitalism. As for Stalin, he
fabricates a theory -- precisely: theories are invented, laws discovered
-- and in defiance of father Marx says: certain economic appearances of
socialism obey usually to the law of exchange (law of value).

## Nature and history

Before we get to the point -- which laws of capitalism Marx puts
forward, which distinguish capitalism from socialism, respectively which
are (perhaps) common to both -, we must point at the common equation of
laws of nature with laws of society.

As students of Marx we must be militants and polemics; we must not solve
such a question scholastically and insists on the theoretical analogy of
both areas, perhaps with the "political" goal, to dodge the following
argument: "Now, if the laws of society aren't as insurmountable as for
example the law of gravity, then let's go: let's knock some over".

How could we forget, that the fight between the giant Marx and the paid
gang in the universities of capital flared up on the point, that the
laws of bourgeois economy are "no laws of nature", and we therefore not
only want to bust this circle of hell, but can bust it. It is true, that
Stalin's scripture reminds, that with Marx the laws of economy aren't
"eternal", but instead correspond to certain social phases and epochs:
slavery, feudalism, capitalism. But Stalin wants to point out that
"certain laws" are common to all epochs and thus also assert themselves
in socialism, which allegedly has an own "political economy". Stalin
ridicules Yaroshenko and Bukharin, that said, that political economy is
succeeded by a "technique of social organsiation" \[Stalin,
p.65\]. Harshly he replies to that, that this new discipline, which
pseudo-Marxist and trembling before the Tsarist police economists[^18]
would have attended to, is in reality an "economic policy" -- and as
such he allows it \[Stalin, p.74\].

Well, whether there will be an economic science in socialism, we will
discuss once things have been put in their correct place again[^19]; but
where there is still an economic policy (like it is under the
dictatorship of the proletariat), there are rivaling classes, and we are
not yet in socialism. And we must ask like Lenin: Who has the power? And
accordingly: Which direction does the economic development take, which
-- there we concur -- takes place in stages? That will the laws of this
development tell us.

As to the general question of laws in nature and history, it will be
dealt with in our theoretical investigations there, where we reply to
the expected attacks, which Marxism -- which indeed has for 999 of 1000
writers established fixed abode in Moscow -- will be subjected to:
Attacks regarding Stalin's banalization of the theory of historical
materialism (that's a theory, not a law) and regarding the questions of
determinism and will, causality and ambition. The original content of
the Marxian position (barely understood and very inconvenient for
people, that pursue a policy of opportunist success) is always that of
the direct class struggle and the historical antagonism between the
classes, a struggle, which alternately resorts to the typewriter and the
machine gun -- provided one isn't able to talk of "feather and sword"
anymore. We conceded to the bourgeoisie the achievement, in its war
against the old classes, to have promoted the critical-scientific method
and to have boldly applied it to the area of nature and then to that of
society. It discovered and proclaimed theories, which today are ours:
value theory (the value of a commodity is determined by the socially
necessary labour time required for its production) and the surplus value
theory (the value of every commodity contains advanced capital and
surplus value, therefore a refund and profit). And triumphantly the
bourgeoisie then proclaimed: "If you admit" (and science will admit it
one century later), "that the same physical laws apply for the
primordial nebula as for our planet today, then you must also admit,
that the current social conditions will apply for all future societies,
because we consensually banish both the intervention of god as well as
pure thought from nature and society". Marxism by contrast delivers the
scientific proof, that within the social cosmos, a cycle carries out,
which will destroy the capitalist forms and laws, and that the future
social cosmos will adhere to other laws. Since you don't mind to remodel
and banalize this mighty work beyond ridiculousness because of domestic
and foreign political purposes, finally do us the favor to omit the
adjectives "Marxist", "socialist" and "communist", and instead use
"economist", "populist", "progressive", and it fits like a glove.

## Marx and the laws

Engels acknowledged Marx as the founder of historical materialism. Marx
explained, his contribution in the application of this theory to the
modern world consisted not of discovering class struggle, but to
introduce the concept of the dictatorship of the proletariat.

Thus, theory leads to the class and party programme, to the organization
of the working class for the insurrection and the seizure of power. In
this great perspective, the investigation of the laws of capitalism
lines up. Two real and fundamental laws are put down in "Capital". In
the first volume, the general law of capitalist accumulation, also known
as the law of increasing impoverishment (often dealt with by us): with
the increasing concentration of capital the number of proletarians and
the "reserve army" grows; we have explained multiple times already, that
this not necessarily implies a fall in the level of consumption or real
living standards of workers. In the second and third volume, the law of
the reproduction of capital is developed (which is interrelated with the
law of the tendency of the average rate of profit to fall, which we will
get back to): a part of the product and thus of labour, must be put
aside by the capitalist, to ensure the reproduction of depreciated
machines, factories etc. (capital goods, for economists). If the
capitalist increases the share destined as reserve asserts, he
"invests", meaning he expands the stock of production facilities and
means of production. Marx's laws on the allocation of the social product
between immediate consumption- and investition goods prove, that as long
as commodity exchange and wage system persist, the system faces crises
and revolutions.

The first law certainly cannot be applied to the socialist society,
because it organizes precisely for the reason that the social reserve
constitutes an individual security for everyone, although this reserve
neither belongs to anybody, nor how in precapitalistic times, is divided
into x little parts. The second law, Stalin tells us, persists in
socialism; and he assures, Marx had foreseen that. Marxism merely
established (among others in the known passage in the "Critique of the
Gotha Programme"), that in communism there will be a social deduction of
individual labour as well, to keep the production facilities in good
condition, to ensure the public services etc. This deduction will not be
of an exploitative character, precisely because it no longer needs to be
mediated by the market economy, and it is precisely for this reason that
the social reserve fund will establish a stable balance -- instead of a
series of shocks -- between the products used for consumption and the
products used as means of production in the subsequent production cycle.

The crucial point in all that is the following: Stalin makes the
valuable concession, that -- because in the state industry the law of
value is in effect -- its businesses function based on "cost accounting
and profitableness, production costs, prices, etc." \[Stalin,
p.20\]. For "etc." we pose: profitable. Additionally, he explains that
the future programme consists of an increase of the production of the
means of production, meaning, that the "plans" of the Soviet government
for the industrialization of the country not so much allow for goods of
consumption for the population, but instead mainly consists of producing
machines, agrarian tools, tractors, fertilizer etc. and to tackle giant
public projects.

Plans aside: The capitalist states make plans, the proletarian
dictatorship will make plans. But the first true socialist plan (which
must be understood as an immediate despotic inroad, see the "Manifesto")
will eventually be a plan to the increase of the costs of production,
shortening of the work day, divestment of capital, quantitative and
especially qualitative levelling of consumption (which is under
capitalist anarchy to nine tenths an absurd waste of product), because
only in this way it will be possible to cope with "business
profitability" and "profitable prices". So, a plan of underproduction
for the drastic reduction of the share of capital goods in
production. The law of reproduction will run out of breath immediately,
when the Marxian "department II" (production of means of consumption)
eventually succeeds in knocking out "department I" (production of means
of production). In any way, the capitalist "concert" has for too long
punished our eardrums.

The means of consumption are for the workers, the means of production
for the entrepreneurs. If the business master is the workers' state, it
shall of course immediately be accepted, that the workers are interested
to "invest" and to sweat from four to eight hours for department I! If
now Yaroshenko abridges the critique of the staggering increase of the
means of production to the formula "primacy of consumption instead of
primacy of production", he becomes very mundane. No less shallow -- to
smuggle in state industrialism under socialist banner -- are agitational
formulas like: "He who doesn't work shall not eat" or "Abolition of the
expropriation of humans through humans", as if it was the highest goal
of the expropriated class to oversee its own expropriation.

Even if we only stick to the analysis of the domestic economy, the
Russian economy in reality makes use of all laws of capitalism. How can
it increase the production of goods not meant for consumption, without
proletarianizing humans? Where shall it take the humans from? The course
is that of primitive accumulation, and mostly the means are as horrible
as those, that are depicted in "Capital": sometime it hits the
kolkhozniki, who suddenly stand there without their cow; sometime the
nomadic shepherds of Asia, which get snatched from their submersion into
the view of the Ursa Major; or the feudal serfs in Mongolia, which are
uprooted from their millenniums-old soil. The slogan is with certainity:
more production goods, more workers, longer work time, higher work
intensity -- in other words: expanded accumulation and reproduction of
capital in infernal pace.

Precisely that is the honor, that we, in defiance of a bunch of dorks,
bestow upon the "great Stalin". Just in the dimension in which the
process of the beginning accumulation of capital takes place and
embraces the provinces of the giant China, the mysterious Tibet, the
legendary Central Asia (out of which the European tribe emerged), will
it be revolutionary and spin the wheel of history forward. But this is
not a socialist, but a capitalist process. In this big part of the
globe, the glorification of the development of productive forces is
necessary. Stalin correctly says, that this is not his credit, but that
of the economic laws, which enforces these "policies" upon him. His
entire undertaking is made up of fraudulent labeling: this is as well a
classical mean of the bearers of primitive accumulation!

In the west, however, the exuberant productive forces for a long time
trigger flood waves, one after another, which prompts the states to
suppress, to devour markets and regions, to prepare blood baths and
wars. Here no plans to increase production help, instead only the plan
to smash a gang of criminals can help here. Especially the plan, to
trash their reeking flag of freedom and parliamentarism.

## Socialism and Communism

We will conclude the economic argument with a synthesis of the stages of
the future society --  a topic, in which the whole of Stalin's
"document" (we were looking for that word the entire time) is causing
confusion. "France Press" accused Stalin of plagiarizing the scripture
of Nikolai Bukharin about the economic laws of the transition
period. Stalin however mentions the texts several times and even draws
upon a critique authored by Lenin[^20]. Commissioned with the
preparation of the programme of the Comintern (which stayed a draft),
Bukharin deserves the great credit of emphasizing the commodity-negating
postulate of the socialist revolution as an issue of primary
importance. He also followed Lenin in the analysis of the transformation
period "in Russia" and the assessment, that during the dictatorship of
the proletariat, forms of commodity production were to be tolerated.

Everything becomes clear, if one bears in mind, that these
investigations of Lenin and Bukharin didn't concern themselves with the
two stages of communist society, of which Marx talks and which Lenin in
a wonderful passage of "State and Revolution" outlines, but with a
phase, which precedes both those stages.

The following scheme can serve as a summary of the certainly not easy
topic of today's "dialogue".

Transition stage: The proletariat has conquered political power and
renders all non-proletarian classes politically powerless, precisely
because it cannot "get rid" of those classes in an instant. This means,
the proletarian state controls an economy, in which partly, even if in
decreasing amount, both a market-based distribution as well as forms of
private disposal of products and means of production exist (these be
fragmented or concentrated). The economy is not yet socialist, it's a
transition economy.

Lower stage of communism, or if you want, socialism: society disposes
already generally of products, which are allocated to members of society
by quotas. This function doesn't require commodity exchange or money
anymore -- one cannot let Stalin's statement pass, according to which
the simple exchange without money, but still based on the law of value,
should bring us closer to communism: rather it is about a kind of
regression to bartering. The allocation of products on the contrary
follows from the center, without return of an equivalent. Example: If a
malaria epidemic breaks out, in the affected region quinine is
distributed for free, but solely one tubule per person.

In this phase, not only compulsory work is necessary, but also the
recording of the performed labour time and its certificate -- the famous
"labour voucher", so much discussed in the last century. The peculiarity
of this certificate is, that it cannot be kept in reserve, so that any
try to accumulate it leads to the loss of the performed labour quantum
without compensation. The law of value is buried.

Engels: "Hence, on the assumptions we made above, society will not
assign values to products".

Higher stage of communism, which can be unhesitatingly called integral
socialism: the productivity of labour is in such a way, that, apart from
pathological cases, neither coercion nor rationing are necessary, to
exclude the squandering of products and human energy. Free consumption
for all. Example: The pharmacies are distributing quinine free and
without constraints. And if one would take ten tubules to poison
himself? He would obviously be just as stupid as the people, which
confuse a rotten bourgeois society with socialism.

In which stage does Stalin find himself? In none of the three. He is in
a transition period, not away from capitalism, but towards
capitalism. It's almost honorable and certainly not self poisoning.

# Third Day (Morning)

On day one we argued the fact, that any system of commodity production
is a capitalist system, ever since through the labour of masses of
humans enormous accumulations of commodities are produced. Capitalism
and commodity production will together fade out of the spheres of
influence that they gradually conquered in the modern world.

On the second day this got taken up again; and coming from the general
process to today's Russian economy, we thought of the laws stated by
Stalin regarding the structure of the Russian economy as
appropriate. The diagnosis of pure capitalism, in the stage of "great
state industrialism" was confirmed.

According to the notion of our dialogue partner, this sufficiently
defined and concrete process can, applied to giant areas and
populations, lead to the accumulation and concentration of a heavy
industry, which doesn't rank behind others, and indeed solely on the
basis of the since 1917 ensued elimination of big landowners, without
inevitably repeating, as at that time in England, France etc., horrible
expropriation of the lower population strata, who are caught in the
subsistent, local economic circles and the fragmented labour technique.

Would one only say with this last point, that the extensive introduction
of modern labour technique with the means of applied science plays out
entirely differently because of the changed situation all over the
world, then was the case centuries ago, then this could be subject of a
separate investigation, namely with the treatment of the "agrarian
question". Could be, that Stalin will show, attaining complete
capitalism not by horse and cart, but by plane -- but he should at least
state the "direction". We, the rank and file, transmit to him from many
ground stations a set of data -- however even the radar can go haywire.

And now a third point: the international relations within the complex
overall context of production, exchange and consumption; political and
military balances of power.

The three points are only aspects of one and the same big question. The
first could be called the historical, the second the economic and the
third the political aspect. Direction and goal of the investigation must
be set in one.

## Products and exchange

In his theoretical corrections and the correspondingly harsh referrals
against the objections of the "comrades", the Russian state and party
leader apparently needs to change fronts every time, when he gets on
from the circulation within the country borders to the transcending
circulation. We already alluded, the reader will recall, that the
western "border guards" at this point have perked up their ears. Far
from again striking up the song of a millenarian autarky, the man in the
Kremlin calmly has set the binoculars on the areas beyond the Iron
Curtain; and old stories about the division of spheres of influence as
an alternative to the saber rattling and the abandonment of relations
get a chance. At least one thing, that doesn't sound as spectacular and
impertinent, as the litany about genocide and craze of aggression.

Stalin claims, the manner, how within Russia (and the sister countries)
industry items are assigned to the rural population and agrarian
products to the urbanites, is perfectly in accordance with socialism --
while slaying everyone and everything with quotes of Marx and Engels,
and, when necessary, correcting their words, sentences and wordings ex
officio. The kolkhozes "freely" sell their products -- there is no other
way of getting hold of their makings; so after all through the market,
but there are special rules: state administered prices (Novelty!
Specialty of the house!) and even special "contracts" about commodity
deliveries with "non-commodity character"[^21], because the state
business don't operate with money, but undertake offset agreements
(Highly original! Role models are the huckster at the next corner, the
American marine, which precisely knows about the equivalence of kissing
and cigarettes, and the mundane "clearings" of the western
countries!). However, the master doesn't find the expression "commodity
delivery" appropriate, one should talk about product exchange. (Adding
this only, so the mistake isn't searched for in the translation). In
short, all more or less conventional equivalent systems, from the barter
of the savages to money as universal equivalent for all products, the
gazillion systems to issue performance and reward, which reach from the
housekeeping book to the complicated banking business, where electronic
brains add up endless queues of numbers, while daily the stifling flood
of kicking their heels sellers of labour power swells -- why did all
this emerge, what is it good for, if not for the exchange of products,
and solely for it?

But Stalin wants to crack the gnawing core of the problem, namely, that
out of the "salaries" of exchange between equivalents a private
accumulation emerges; and he says, there were guarantees against that.

Even for a generalissimo it is difficult to stay in the saddle with such
a thesis and alternately fence in two directions -- one blow against
theoretical rigour, one blow against the revisionist
concessions. Elasticity of the real Leninist Bolshevism? No,
*eclecticism*, was our answer; back then that was the last straw for the
Bolsheviks.

Now, no matter in what shape the domestic conditions might be (whose
investigation is neither finished today, nor in the scope of this
study), as soon as the talk is of the foreign relations, even Stalin
raises concerns. The comrade Notkin had to get an earful, because he
claimed that even the machines and tools produced in the state
businesses are commodities. They have value, their price is determined
and yet they aren't commodities? One can literally see Notkin being
aghast. Value and price are, according to Stalin, "needed in order, in
the interests of our foreign trade, to conduct *sales* of means of
production to foreign countries. Here, in the sphere of foreign trade,
but *only in this sphere*" (underlined in the original), "our means of
production really are commodities, and really are sold (in the direct
meaning of the term)." \[Stalin, p. 53\].

The last parentheses originate in the officially released
text. Presumably the improvident Notkin put the word "sold", which a
Marxist and Bolshevik is quite fed up with, in quotes. He must have
missed the latest training courses.

In a few years, we would be interested in the following information: The
*volume* of the balance of trade please, so the ratio of commodity
import and export. And another thing: should this balance turn out
positively or negatively? From the so called law of the well-planned
"proportional" development of the national economy we know that the
social product should grow at a furious speed. We don't speak Russian,
but assume that thereby it is to be understood: plans for the
"uninterrupted growth of production", that is analogous to the law of
population growth or compound interest. We therefore propose the
following, correct denotation: planning of growth in geometric
progression. The "curve" drawn right, we would write up the following
law with the little brains we have: socialism starts where this curve
breaks down.

For today we record Stalin's concession: the products destined for
foreign trade, among them the means of production, are commodities, not
only "formally", in accounting, but also in "character".

That is one thing. It is enough to discuss across a few thousand
kilometers to finally come to understanding regarding anything.

## Profit and surplus value

A little bit more patience, then we will talk of high politics and
strategy, and then the frowning will end, because everyone understands
the point: will Caesar attack? Pompeius flee? Do we meet at Philippi
again? Will we cross the Rubicon? That is welcomed fodder for
conversation that lifts the spirits.

We must point to another point of Marxist political economy. The power
of things leads the marshal to the explosive problem of the world
market. The USSR, he says, supports its sister countries through
economic aid, which accelerates their industrialization. Does that also
apply for Czechoslovakia as well as China, that is, for an already
capitalist country, as well as for a country, in which the capitalist
mode of production is still in the early stages and only constitutes a
fraction of aggregate production? Let's see. "It may be confidently said
that, with this pace of industrial development, it will soon come to
pass that these countries will not only be in no need of imports from
capitalist countries, but will themselves feel the necessity of finding
an outside market for their surplus products." \[Stalin, p.32\]. Which
again brings up the question: if production (and export) is done for the
west, then those are commodities; and if it is done for Russia, what are
they then?

The point about this return to the system of commodity production,
consummated with flying colours, which is identical with the capitalist
system in form and character (if one does not fall for the economic
*make-up*), is that it is founded on the imperative: export to produce
more! Effectively it is the same imperative which also pertains *within*
the supposed "socialist country": the relations between town and
country, between the famous "associated classes", are about an
import-export business, because here also, as already mentioned, the law
of geometric progression applies, which says: more production! More
production!

What remains of Marxism? Barely anything! Since "the working class,
\[is\] now in power", it is "necessary" to "abandon" the offensive
formulas which distinguish between *necessary labour* and *surplus
labour*, *paid* and unpaid labour \[Stalin, p.18/19\]. While the law of
surplus value (which here according to Stalin's criteria is a *theory*
and not a *law*), first somewhat was spared, from today the following
applies: "It is said that the law of the average rate of profit is the
basic economic law of modern capitalism. That is not true. Modern
capitalism, monopoly capitalism" (there you go: what did you know, poor
Marx?) "cannot content it-self with the average profit, which moreover
has a tendency to decline, in view of the increasing organic composition
of capital. It is not the average profit, but the maximum profit that
modern monopoly capitalism demands". While the subordinate clause
("which it needs...") seems to bring the extinguished Marxian law into
being for a moment, the new law is decreed after all: The demand for
maximum profit "will be the basic economic law of modern capitalism"
\[Stalin, p.39\].

If the flamethrower in the library isn't halted, not even his moustache
is going to be spared.

Those twisted counter-theses, which try to secure themselves against any
objection, are unbearable. First, it is stated that the economic laws of
monopoly capitalism would *entirely differ* from the capitalism "of
Marx". And then the same counter-theses assert that the economic laws of
socialism could very well be *the same* as those of capitalism. Fresh
air, quick!

Let's heroically return to the ABC. One here has to remind of the
distinction between the mass of profit and the mass of surplus value,
between rate of profit and rate of surplus value, and of the meaning of
the Marxian law of the tendency of the average rate of profit to fall,
which is stated in detail at the beginning of the third "Capital"
volume. Reading -- understanding! It is not the capitalist that tends to
decrease profit. It is not profit (the mass of profit) that decreases,
but the rate of profit! Not the rate of any profit, but the average rate
of *social* profit. Not any week or in any issue of the "Financial
Times", but historically, in the development predestined by Marx towards
the "*social monopoly of the means of production*" in the grip of
capital, whose definition, genesis, life and death *are written*.

He who understands this, can see that the effort, not of the single
capitalist (a minor figure in Marx), but of the historical machine of
capital (this "ensouled corpus" talented with "vis vitalis"), to escape
the *law of the tendency of the rate of profit to fall* is futile; and
precisely this law let's us conclude the following, classical theses (to
which Stalin, confusing the west, again confesses):

*First*: Inevitability of war between the capitalist countries.

*Second*: Inevitability of the *revolutionary* overthrow of capitalism,
*wheresoever*.

It is a giant effort that the capitalist system deploys in fight against
its own collapse, and which expresses itself in the slogan: evermore
production! Not only no stagnation, but achieving the maximization of
the maximization at any time. In mathematics: geometrical progression;
in music: "crescendo á la Rossini". And for that purpose (once the
entire *motherland* is mechanized): export. And to memorise the doctrine
of the last five centuries well: "Trade follows the flag".

But that, Jughashvili, is *their* doctrine!

## Engels and Marx

For our line of argument, we once again have to return to Marx and
Engels. This time not to the self-contained and complete texts, as if
made from one piece by one or the other, written with full power and the
groundbreaking eagerness of those who know neither doubt, nor are
flustered and who remove obstacles in the way, without caring about
their resistance. It is about the Marx, of which his "executor of
testament" gives account in the almost dramatic prefaces to the
II. (5.5.1885) and to the III. (4.10.1894) volume of "Capital". First it
is about explaining the state of the enormous mass of materials and
manuscripts -- they reach from chapters in elaborated form to loose
pages, notices, summaries, illegible abbreviations, promises regarding
later to be developed points, as well as uncertainly and cautiously
composed pages provided with annotations -- with the deteriorating
health of Marx, with the inescapable ramifications of the progressing
disease which forces interruptions upon him, which quail and attack the
mighty brain more than rest lets him heal. The work accomplished by this
human machine between the years 1863 and 1867, among it the flawlessly
composed first volume of his main work, is immeasurable. Already in the
years 1864 to 1865 the disease showed first signs of health disorders;
the imperturbable sight of his great "colleague" Engels notices the
traces of its devastating aftermaths in the unreleased notebooks. But
after that the same bone-grinding work -- deciphering, examining,
dictating, reorganizing of texts, classification of material: all that
with the will not to compose anything distinct -- exceeds also the power
of the extremely robust Engels. For too long he spent nights awake over
the scriptures of his friend; a worrying eye weakness "for years
\[restricts\] \[this\] writing time to a minimum", as he got disallowed
from "taking the quill into the hand under artificial light". Neither
defeated nor discouraged he apologizes sincerely and humbly to the *task
--* more was not granted to him. Modestly he reminds of all the other
areas, in which the brunt more and more fell to him "solely". One year
later, he died.

This is neither incidental nor conceited. It should only make clear that
the aspiration of editorial diligence which determined Engels'
compilation work engendered that in the last two volumes of Capital the
periodically returning sections of synthesis and summary almost fully
are missing. Engels' quill we also owe such parentheses, and not few or
of little use of them; but he doesn't want to manage something "which
just wasn't in Marx' book", and so he confines himself to analysis. Had
it been different, certain shady interpretations (today as half a
century ago) would have been futile, for example the sad legend,
according to which Marx in the third and last volume revoked --
according to the personal taste of the author: in the philosophy, the
economic science or the politics -- something. In truth in the first
volume there are as many explicit references to the early scriptures or
the "Manifesto" as connections between the last two scriptures and the
first volume -- thousands of passage of correspondence reinforce this.

Here it is even less than in Engels' work about conducting "Capital
research". Let's just remark that Marx in one of those short summaries
says, why he is so thoroughly dealing with the law of the tendency of
the rate of profit to fall. Engels hesitates to recite the fragment and
puts it in parentheses, "because, though a rehash of the notes of the
original manuscript, it goes in some points beyond the scope of the
material found in the original."

"\[The law of increased productivity of labour is not, therefore,
absolutely valid for capital. So far as capital is concerned,
productiveness does not increase through a saving in living labour in
general, but only through a saving in the *paid* portion of living
labour, as compared to labour expended in the past, as we have already
indicated in passing in Book I (Ch. XI II, 2, 5. 409/398). Here the
capitalist mode of production is beset with another contradiction. Its
historical mission is unconstrained development in geometrical
progression of the productivity of human labour. It goes back on its
mission whenever, as here, it checks the development of productivity. It
thus demonstrates again that it is becoming senile and that it is more
and more outlived.\]"

Unaffected by the pharisaical objection that after another 60 years of
capitalism (however with a strong dash of decay) one should with the as
always "careless" Marx triple the parentheses instead of cancel them
out, we emphasize the programmatic theses which Marx so "gladly"
inserted in the discerning and profound *analyses*. So capitalism will
collapse. And post-capitalism? It is like that: As the productivity of
every work unit increases, we do not increase the *mass of products*,
but decrease the *working time of the living*. Why does the West not
want to know something about that? Because there is only one single way
to flee from the law of the fall in the rate of profit:
overproduction. And the East? Ditto. But for the sake of fairness let's
remark that capitalism there is still undergoing its *adolescence*.

## Rate and Mass

It is time to again turn towards the deduction of the law: As long as we
are not smitten with blindness, it is anyway not on the scrap heap. We
will there circumvent both the language of numbers as well as algebraic
symbolism and, as far as possible, preserve the brevity and the polish
of the fable. "Could commodities themselves speak", Marx says in one of
those wonderful passages of "Capital", "they would say: Our use value
may be a thing that interests men. It is no part of us as objects. What,
however, does belong to us as objects, is our value. Our natural
intercourse as commodities proves it. In the eyes of each other we are
nothing but exchange values."

So we attached a microphone on the marketplace on which the commodities
hailing from Russia and America meet. The ones from the "higher levels"
have allowed them to speak a common economic language. For both
commodities, the sacrosanct principle applies that the targeted *market
price* must lie above the *cost of production* (otherwise they would not
have travelled the long way). In both homelands one is concerned with
producing them at low cost and to sell at high price.

The commodity hailing from the land of capitalist theory has the word:
"I am made of two parts and therefore only one weld is visible on me:
the *cost of production* (a living and used up *advance* of my producer)
and the *profit*, that together add up to the precise sum below I, don't
delude yourselves, don't meet my principles. To encourage the buyer, I
content myself with a modest profit: through a simple calculation --
profit divided by cost of production -- you can check the rate of this
profit. Suppose my cost is 10 and you can own me for 11, do you want to
be stingy and claim that the ten percent rate is excessively high? Step
right up, ladies and gentlemen..."

We now hand the microphone to the other commodity. It talks like this:
"For us Marxist economics is critical. You see two welds on me. I have
no reason to hide that: Because I consist of three and not of two
parts. The trick with the other commodity is that it isn't visible
there. To produce me, there are two expenditures: raw materials,
consumption of instruments of production and suchlike, which we call
constant capital invested in me -- and the compensation of human labour,
which we call variable capital. The sum forms what the lady before me
called cost of production. For me as well you have to add a yield, an
earning or profit, which is my third and last part: called surplus
value. For the advanced constant capital, we calculate nothing on top,
as we know that it does not add value: only labour, meaning the variable
part of the advance creates value. So, if you want to determine the
percentage or the rate, not of profit but of surplus value, it is very
easy as well: you just have to divide the surplus value by the second
part of the capital advanced for me, that is, the wages."

Whereupon the ordinary buyer replies: "Explain that to your hairdresser!
The only thing my wallet is interested in is the end cost, that is, your
respective sale price."

There is spat between the two commodities, in which each claims to want
to close the less profitable deal and to settle for the lowest profit
rate. As neither of them can press it down to zero, the one that
actually has the lowest cost of production wins, as Stalin also
incessantly indicates. For the constant part, quantity and quality of
raw materials are given. The competition in both export countries is
staged on the variable part. And certainly, there is the solution to pay
the workers less, to let them work longer, but predominantly labour
productivity is backed, which is conditioned by technological progress,
the use of more powerful machines and the ever more rational
organization of firms. Already both sides are displaying glossy prints
of their large-scale plants, where each prides itself in having reduced
the number of employees at constant or larger scale of production. But
one thing that the buyers care even less about is knowing on which side
of the contested market the workers are being paid and treated better.

The reader will, so we think, without effort determine the difference
between both methods of value analysis. The rate of surplus value is
always much higher than the rate of profit, and all the more as the
constant capital outweighs the variable.

Now, the Marxian law of the fall of the average rate of profit deals
with profit as a whole, that is, the total return of all spheres of
production, regardless of the later to deal with distribution (between
the banker, the industrialist and the landowner). In the 13th chapter of
the third volume of "Capital", Marx reminds: "We intentionally present
this law before going on to the division of profit" ("Profit is for us,
for the time being, only another name for or another category of surplus
value") "into different independent categories." This "shows from the
outset that this law is, in its entirety, independent of this
division". And so it also applies if the state behaves as owner, banker
and entrepreneur.

The law is based on the general historical process -- denied by no one,
apologized for by everyone -- of the incessant development of
productivity due to the application of ever more complicated
instruments, tools, machines, ever more diverse technical processes and
of scientific achievements on manual labour. For a given mass of
products, fewer and fewer workers are needed. The capital advanced that
needed to be invested to get hands on this mass of products continuously
changes what Marx calls the *organic composition*: ever more
substance-based capital, ever less wage capital. Few workers suffice to
bestow an enormous "increase in value" on the to be processed material,
because they can process a lot more of it in comparison to the past. In
this too one agrees. And further? Even assumed that capital exacerbates
exploitation and increases the rate of surplus value by paying the
workers less (even though this often happens, it only has the character
of a law from the point of view of lounge revolutionaries), the squeezed
out surplus value, respectively profit, will indeed increase, in face of
the much stronger increase of the mass of purchased raw materials, with
equal number of labour powers, the profit rate will continue to fall:
Precisely because the rate expresses the relation of the slightly bigger
profit (profit mass) to the enormously increased total advance in wages
and material.

Capital demands the "maximum profit"? For sure, it demands it and it
finds it as well, but it cannot prevent that meanwhile the profit rate
falls. The mass of profit increases, because the population and still
more the proletariat grows, the processed material becomes evermore
impressive and the mass of products increases. In infancy: small
capitals, divided between many and invested at a good rate; in old age:
giant capitals, divided on few (consequence of concentration which
develops in parallel to accumulation), admittedly invested at a low
rate, however with the result of the exorbitant, vertigo-inducing
increase of social capital, of social profit, of average business
capital and profit.

There is no contradiction with the Marxian law of the fall in the rate
of profit, which could only be detained by the reduction of labour
productivity, by "degeneration" of the *organic composition* of capital;
an issue against which Stalin at the moment hauls out the big guns, a
terrain on which he desperately tries to subdue his enemies.

## 19^th^ and 20^th^ century

In no. 2 (1952) of "Il programma comunista" we published some plain
numbers from capitalist sources about the American economy. They prove
the law determined by Marx and negated by Stalin. According to
statistics 1848, that is, at the appearance of industrial capitalism in
the USA, of 1000 value units which were added to the processed material
in the process of production, 510 units went as wages to the workers and
490 as profit to the entrepreneurs. If one disregards depreciation of
machines, general expenses etc., those numbers on the one hand represent
variable capital, on the other hand represent surplus value. Their
ratio, or the rate of surplus value, is 96%.

How did the bourgeois calculate the rate of profit? To answer this, we
have to know the value of the processed raw materials. We can only guess
it, by assuming the hypothesis that in the crawling phase of industry
every worker produces the quadruple of his wage on average. If the wages
amount to 510, the constitute 2040 units. The costs of production
amount to 2550 in total. High rate of profit: 19.2%. We notice anyway
that it always lies beneath the rate of surplus value.

In the year 1929, after a long cycle of insane growth, the workers only
received 362 of 1000 newly added value units, the capitalists however
\638. Don't start to get confused now: Until "black Friday" the wages
increased, and the living standard of the workers increased strongly --
that doesn't change a thing. As one sees, the rate of surplus value,
respectively exploitation increased drastically: from 96% to 176%. If
now, after one has written one's fingers to the bone, there is still
someone who doesn't understand that one can be exploited even more
despite higher wages and better food, then he should go home! He has not
understood the consequences of the increased productivity of labour
power, consisting of sweat and blood of hard workers and ending up in
the pockets of the bourgeois.

Let's now determine the value of total production. Let's assume that
between 1848 and 1929 thanks to improved machines and with same number
of workers ten times more raw materials than before could be
processed. We can quietly assume those low numbers: with the certainity
of one, who is somewhat familiar with scientific syntheses and therefore
without problems starts with preconditions which are inconvenient for
the own thesis and which benefit the enemy, those hair-splitters, which
take delight in checking everything fifteen times. Because the workers
now receive 362 as opposed to the 510 before, one could think that the
share in raw materials decreased from 2040 to 1448; the opposite is the
case: the share rises to 14480. With a total expense of 14842 in
investments and a profit of 638, one has a rate of profit of about
4.5%. The fall of the rate of profit: here we have it. It is enough to
pull off one's head before Marx; it is not necessary to hand a tissue to
"Uncle Sam" to dry his crocodile tears! You have understood, we searched
for the rate and not the mass of profit. To get an image of the total
extent of production -- even if not in real values, then still in form
of a comparison between both epochs -- one has to consider that a
national product of 3040 in the year 1848 is faced with 15480 in 1929:
with non-noteworthy increase of worker hands. In reality however, the
worker population has multiplied by ten in the course of the 80
years. One can thus estimate the total product at 154800, about the
fiftyfold of the year 1848. While the average rate of profit of the
factory owners fell from 19.2% to 4.3%, the mass of profit increased
from 490 to 6390, meaning it is fourteen times as high. Surely our
numbers are still far too modest. Important was only to prove, that
American capitalism in the race to the maximum profit adheres to the law
of the fall in the rate of profit. Stalin cannot educe any new laws from
it. Additionally, we didn't account for the concentration; if we apply a
factor of 10 here, the average profit (in mass) of the American
enterprises amounts to the 140-fold. There it is: the course for crisis,
and the confirmation of Marxism.

We will allow ourselves an even bolder calculation now. Let's assume the
American working class assumes power in a situation as in that of 1929;
let's repeat the numbers: 14480 raw materials, 362 labour powers, 638
profit, meaning 15480 total product.

And then the workers read Marx and use "the increased productive power
of capital for the saving of living labour as such". A decree of the
revolutionary committee pushes down production to 10000 (where it is
pushed down we will see; remind yourselves that there won't be any
presidential elections or similar events anymore). The workers will
first settle for not adding the entire profit (which is burdened with
dues and general expenses) to their wage of 362, but much less, so they
arrive at, let's say 500. For the functioning of public facilities and
state-run administrative bodies we deduce even more than the 638 of the
now removed capitalists, let's say 700. According to our calculation
there are only 8800 of to be processed raw materials instead of 14480;
if the number of workers stays constant, the working day of each is
reduced by 40%: from 8 to less than 5 hours. As a first step, that's
neat. If we now calculate the hourly wage, we would see that it
increased by about 132 percent: from a bit, more of 44 to about 103.

This would not be socialism. But while Stalin assumes to have discovered
a new law of socialism, which is in truth a law of capitalism (with the
increase of labour productivity production grows), we confront him with
the opposite law: the increase of productivity leads to the decrease of
human labour effort, where the extent of production either stays
constant or later, after the poison dripping and blood sucking branches
of the capitalist trunk has been removed, begins to increase in a smooth
curve and in a way adequate for humanity.

As long as the call resounds to increase production by mobilization of
all powers, that just means to desperately resist against the Marxian
law of the fall of the rate of profit. Because the rate of profit
decreases, even though the mass of surplus value and profit do not
decrease, progress rhetoric and hurries will shout at a scampered
humanity ever more loudly: work more, produce more! And when the local
workers faced with their frugal compensation cannot buy the surplus
product, one needs to find means to conquer markets in foreign countries
to ensure consumption. That is the vicious cycle of imperialism, which
inevitably has found its solution in war -- and a temporary escape from
the final crisis in the reconstruction of the destroyed works of
humanity, created in centuries.

Reconstruction of the destroyed, then construction of capitalist
production facilities in vast areas, and today the race for markets:
Those are all rails which Stalin is following; and this train,
undertaken by whoever, knows only two changing points: low costs of
production or war.

We will finish the depiction of this fundamental law with another
wording about capitalism, which Marx adds in the fifteenth chapter of
the third volume. As always, it simultaneously stands for the programme
of communist society.

"Three cardinal facts of capitalist production: 1) Concentration of
means of production in few hands, whereby they cease to appear as the
property of the immediate labourers and turn into social production
capacities. Even if initially they are the private property of
capitalists. These are the trustees of bourgeois society, but they
pocket all the proceeds of this trusteeship. 2) Organisation of labour
itself into social labour: through co-operation, division of labour, and
the uniting of labour with the natural sciences.

In these two senses, the capitalist mode of production abolishes private
property and private labour, even though in contradictory forms.
3) Creation of the world-market."

As usual the "thread" lead us where it needed to lead us. And the reader
should know that the "day" still has not drawn to a close, but that it
is only noon. The "morning" might have been as hard and complicated as a
symphony by Wagner.

Will the concluding "afternoon" play a lighter music on the steep way?
Maybe. „L'après-midi d'une faune"[^22]? However, our faun appears in the
coarse figure and with the threatening gesture of the blood red mars.

# Third Day (Afternoon)

On the first two days and during today's morning we dealt with all
passages in Stalin's scripture which allow to find those laws by which
the Russian economy can be directed.

In theoretical regard, we have fundamentally refuted that an economy
denoted by such laws could be defined as socialism or its lower stage,
equally we disputed that one is able to appoint to Marx's and Engels'
fundamental texts for such a purpose. In those scriptures, we find, even
if not in the banal ease which one glazes over a comic, the economic
characteristics of capitalism, as well as those of socialism and the
phenomena which allow to verify the economic transition from one to the
other mode of production.

In empirical regard, we could draw a series of definite conclusions. In
the Russian domestic market, the law of value prevails; therefore:
1. The products have commodity character;
2. A market exists
3. The exchange takes place, according to the law of value, between
equivalents; and the equivalents have a monetary expression.

The great mass of agrarian businesses works solely with regard to
commodity production and partly in form of an individual appropriation
of products on the side of parcel farmers (which in the other part of
his labour time functions as cooperative farmer, kolkhozniki), a form
therefore, which is even further away from socialism, in some sense
precapitalistic and barter economic.

The small and medium sized businesses, which manufacture factory
commodities, also work for sales on the market.

The large enterprises finally are owned by the state, which doesn't mean
much: their bookkeeping carries a monetary character and by prices -- in
which the reign of the law of value is already implied -- expenditures
(for raw materials, wages) and revenues (sold products) are confronted
with each other, therefore audited whether the enterprises operate
viable, meaning whether they yield a profit, a surplus.

The reasoning about the scope of the Marxist law of the rate of profit
and its fall was good for exposing Stalin's hollow antithesis: Because
the proletariat wielded power, the gigantic apparatus of nationalized
industry wouldn't aim for maximum profit (like in the capitalist
countries), but is concerned for the maximum welfare of the workers and
the people.

Towards the thesis according to which between the interests of the
workers in the state industry and those of the "Soviet people" -- this
mishmash of individual- and cooperative farmers, hucksters, managers of
small and mid-sized industrial firms and so on -- there weren't any
fundamental antagonisms, not on the level of daily demands either, we
have the biggest reservations. But apart from that, we have got the
proof precisely out of the "law of the planned development of the
national economy in geometrical progression" confirmed by Stalin, that
the capitalist law of the fall in the rate of profit is in effect. If a
five year plan purports an increase in production by 20%, meaning from
100 to 120, and the following plan again purports a growth of 20%, then
this means that production should not grow from 120 to 140, but from 120
to 144 (20% increase of the new cycle, which now starts with 120). He
who is a bit familiar with numbers knows that the difference at the
start seems marginal, later however assumes gigantic magnitudes. Do you
remember the story of the creator of chess, who wanted to make a present
to the emperor of China? He asked for one corn on the first square, two
on the second, four on the third... all corn chambers of the heavenly
empire wouldn't have sufficed to fill the 64 squares.

Now, his law is de facto nothing else than the categorical imperative:
produce evermore!  This imperative belongs solely to capitalism and the
following chain of causes is at its foundation: Increase of labour
productivity -- increase of constant capital in relation to variable
capital, thus the organic composition -- fall in the rate of profit --
necessity to compensate the fall with the rampant increase of capital
investments and production of commodities.

If we had really started to build up the socialist economy in a
rudimentary way, we would have noticed that the economic imperative had
changed, and that it would have turned out to be ours: since the power
of human labour is multiplied by technical achievements: with steady
production, work less! And where the conditions of a revolutionary power
of the proletariat really do exist, that is to say, in those countries
which are already over-equipped with facilities: produce less and work
even less!

The mere fact that Russia has to issue the slogan of "increasing product
mass" confirms our thesis. It is finally confirmed by the fact that a
significant proportion of the products of major state-owned industry are
sold on foreign markets, and here Stalin openly states that the
relationship is not only for accounting purposes, but by the very nature
of things a commodity relation.

Basically, this includes the confession that "building socialism in one
country" is not possible, even if it were only because of worldwide
competition (which is always prepared to shoot with cannons and atomic
bombs instead of the artillery of low prices). Only in the absurd
hypothesis that the "socialist country" could close itself off behind a
real iron curtain would it be possible for the country to take the first
steps in one direction (planning "by society in the interest of
society"), which, thanks to the labour productivity achieved by
technical achievements, would lead to a reduction in labour efforts and
exploitation of the worker. And only within such a hypothesis could the
plan be, after the insane geometric curve of capitalist madness has been
abandoned: Let us determine a certain standard of consumption for all
residents, set by the plan; once we have reached that level, we will
stop production and resist the criminal temptation to push it further,
just to see where we get rid of it again, who we can force it on.

However, the Kremlin's full attention, both ideologically and
practically, is focused on the world market.

## Competition and Monopoly

A superficial approach places the Marxist theories of modern colonialism
and imperialism next to the Marxist description of capitalism of free
competition (which supposedly unfolded until about 1880), as if these
were different treatises or at best supplements.

In various speeches we have insisted that the allegedly sober
description of a "liberal" and "peaceful" capitalism in Marx, which by
the way never existed, is in reality nothing more than a gigantic
"polemical demonstration from a party and class point of view", on the
basis of which -- if one recognises for a moment that capitalism
functions in accordance with the unrestricted dynamics of free exchange
between the bearers of equivalent values (which doesn't express anything
else than the famous law of value) -- the character of capitalism can be
conceived: Namely, to be a societal class monopoly which, from the first
episodes of primitive accumulation up to today's robbery, incessantly
strives to heist the generated "balances" under the mask of the
contractually secured, free and equal exchange.

Starting from the exchange of equal commodity values, Marx shows the
creation of surplus value, which is invested, leading to the
accumulation of new, increasingly concentrated capital; he further shows
that the only way (compatible with the continuation of capitalist
production) to resolve the contradiction between the accumulation of
wealth on one pole and the accumulation of misery on the opposite pole
and to escape the resulting law of the fall in the rate of profit is to
produce more and more beyond what is necessary for consumption; by
pointing this out, it becomes clear that from the outset the clash
between the capitalist countries is looming; everyone feels the
irresistible urge to sell their own commodities on the territory of the
other and to avert their own crisis by stirring it up at the rival.

Official economics tried in vain to prove the possibility of achieving a
stable equilibrium on the world market with the rules and mechanisms of
commodity production, even claiming that crises would be a thing of the
past once the "civilized" organization of capitalism had spread
everywhere. That is why Marx had to engage in an abstract discussion of
the laws of a single, non-exporting, fictitious country of fully
developed capitalism -- and he proved that this country will
"explode". It is all the more obvious that, where the above-mentioned
commodity relations arise between two closed economic zones, they are
not an element of pacification but one of shock and the thesis of the
"civilized world organization" becomes all the more obsolete. Only in
one case would we be in serious theoretical embarrassment: if the first
50 years of this century had continued to be wrapped in economic and
political cotton wool, with serious free trade, neutrality and
disarmament agreements. Since the world on the contrary has become a
hundred times more capitalist, it has been shaken a hundred times more
by earthquakes in every respect.

To show who doesn't twist the words here, we quote a footnote from the
24th chapter of Capital volume I: "We here take no account of export
trade, by means of which a nation can change articles of luxury either
into means of production or means of subsistence, and vice versà. In
order to examine the object of our investigation in its integrity, free
from all disturbing subsidiary circumstances, we must treat the whole
world as one nation, and assume that capitalist production is everywhere
established and has possessed itself of every branch of industry."

The work of Marx -- in which, as we always emphasize, theory and
programme form an inseparable whole -- was conceived from the outset in
such a way that it concludes with the phase in which the contradictions
of the first capitalist centers are reproduced on an international
level. The demonstration that a "social partnership" between the social
classes of a country is impossible as a definitive solution and
regressive as a temporary solution, attends the in all points analogous
demonstration of the illusory character of a peace treaty between
states.

It has been recalled several times that in the preface to his 1859 book
"A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy", Marx outlined the
order of the headings as follows: "capital, landed property,
wage-labour; the State, foreign trade, world market. The economic
conditions of existence of the three great classes into which modern
bourgeois society is divided are analysed under the first three
headings;" and he adds: "the interconnection of the other three headings
is self-evident."

When Marx began writing down "Capital", whose first part integrates the
subject of "A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy", the
plan was on the one hand deepened and on the other hand it seemed to be
restricted. In the preface to the first volume ("The Process of
Production of Capital") Marx announced that the II. volume deals with
the "process of circulation" (simple and extended reproduction of the
capital invested in production) and the III. would deal with "the forms
assumed by capital in the course of its development". Apart from book IV
about the history of the theories of value, whose materials have been
available since the "Critique", volume III indeed deals with the
representation of the overall process, examines the distribution of
surplus value between industrialists, landowners and bankers, and
concludes with the "discontinued" chapter on "The classes". The final
version was obviously intended to develop the question of the state and
the international market, for which the preparatory work had been done
before and after Capital in other landmark texts of Marxism.

## Markets and Empires

Already in the "Manifesto" and the volume I of Capital, the emergence of
the overseas market in the wake of the geographic discoveries of the
15th century is highlighted as a fundamental factor of capitalist
accumulation and the primary importance of the trade wars between
Portugal, Spain, Holland, France and England is pointed out.

At the time of the polemical and class-struggling portrayal of "typical"
capitalism, the English Empire dominated the world stage, and so Marx
and Engels paid the greatest attention to it and its economy. In theory,
this economy pretended to be liberalism; in reality, it was an
imperialism that had held the world monopoly at least since 1855. In
"Imperialism", Lenin refers in this respect to letters from Engels and
to the foreword that he 1892 put in front of the new edition of his
study "The Situation of the Working Class in England" of 1844. Engels
refused to "strike out of the text the many prophecies, amongst others
that of an imminent social revolution in England" from the text bearing
the "stamp of the author's youth". Much more important to him seemed to
have foreseen that England would lose its industrial world monopoly; and
he was right a thousand times. While the "world market and colonial
monopoly" had the effect of putting the English proletariat to sleep --
the world's first proletariat with a pronounced class character -- the
end of the British monopoly spread the seeds of class struggle and
revolution throughout the world. Clearly, this takes more time than in
the "fictitious single, thoroughly capitalist country"; but for us, the
revolutionary solution is already theoretically foreseen, the detours
and reasons for its "postponement" only confirm its validity. It will
come.

Let's go back to the foreword by Engels (which is reproduced a little
differently in Lenin's case): "The Free Trade theory was based upon one
assumption: that England was to be the one great manufacturing centre of
an agricultural world. And the actual fact is that this assumption has
turned out to be a pure delusion. The conditions of modern industry,
steam-power and machinery, can be established wherever there is fuel,
especially coals. And other countries besides England-France, Belgium,
Germany, America, even Russiahave coals. And the people over there did
not see the advantage of being turned into Irish pauper farmers merely
for the greater wealth and glory of English capitalists. They set
resolutely about manufacturing, not only for themselves, but for the
rest of the world; and the consequence is that the manufacturing
monopoly enjoyed by England for nearly a century is irretrievably broken
up."

A paradox? We could only refute the comedy of "liberal" capitalism
because this was the -- for a limited period -- unprecedented historical
fall of a world monopoly. „Laissez faire, laissez passer"[^23], but keep
the fleet (larger than all the others put together) on alert so that
none of the Napoleons escape from the Saint Helena's....

In the "morning" we have quoted a passage from volume III, concluding a
new synthesis of capitalist characteristics with the words: "Creation of
the world-market". It will not do us any harm to repeat another powerful
passage.

"The real barrier of capitalist production is capital itself. It is that
capital and its self-expansion appear as the starting and the closing
point, the motive and the purpose of production; that production is only
production for capital and not vice versa, the means of production are
not mere means for a constant expansion of the living process of the
society of producers. The limits within which the preservation and
self-expansion of the value of capital resting on the expropriation and
pauperisation of the great mass of producers can alone move -- these
limits come continually into conflict with the methods of production
employed by capital for its purposes, which drive towards unlimited
extension of production, towards production as an end in itself, towards
unconditional development of the social productivity of labour. The
means -- unconditional development of the productive forces of society
-- comes continually into conflict with the limited purpose, the
self-expansion of the existing capital. The capitalist mode of
production is, for this reason, a historical means of developing the
material forces of production and creating an appropriate world-market
and is, at the same time, a continual conflict between this its
historical task and its own corresponding relations of social
production."

Once again, it remains true: Russian "economic policy" has certainly
developed the material productive forces, has indeed expanded the world
market, but within the capitalist forms of production. It does indeed
represent a useful historical tool: no less than the industrial invasion
at the expense of the starving Scots and Irish or the Wild West Indians,
but it cannot loosen the relentless grip of the contradictions of
capitalism, which very well potentiates the forces of society, but which
for that must debilitate and subjugate the workers' association.

No matter from which side you look at it, the end point is always the
world market -- just as with Stalin. It has never been "uniform", except
in abstract terms, as in that hypothetical country of absolute and
chemically pure capitalism, whose unrealizability we have mathematically
proven. Should it ever arise, it would immediately disintegrate into its
individual parts, such as certain atoms and crystals that only exist for
a fraction of a second. Therefore, when the dream of a unified sterling
market had been over, Lenin was able to give a fitting description of
the colonial and semi-colonial division of the world between five or six
imperialist monster states on the eve of World War I. The war was not
followed by a system of equilibrium, but by a new and different
division; even Stalin admits, that Germany "having broken out of bondage
and taken the path of independent development", had reason to turn its
forces against the imperialist Franco-English-American bloc during the
Second World War. But how can all this be reconciled with the
hypocritical propaganda that for years represented the war of this bloc
as non-imperialist, even "democratic"? How can this be reconciled with
the hysterical shouting about the pardon of the "war criminal"
Kesselring[^24]? Woe betide comrades Tomovich, Dickovich and Harryvich
if they dare to ask such questions!

So, new division of the world, and a new reason to wage war. Before
coming to Stalin's judgement of the division resulting after the Second
World War, we cannot resist the temptation to mention another passage
from Lenin's "imperialism", which we dedicate in particular to the
economic part of the "dialogue" of the previous days. Lenin mocks a
German economist named Liefmann, who wrote the following song of praise
for imperialism: "Commerce is an occupation having for its object the
collection, storage and supply of goods." Lenin gives him a blow that
hits him with many other Liefmanns: "From this it would follow that
commerce existed in the time of primitive man, who knew nothing about
exchange, and that it will exist under socialism!" The exclamation mark
is of course from Lenin. Moscow, where will you put it?

## Latitude and longitude degrees

According to Stalin, the most important economic outcome of the Second
World War is not so much to have knocked out two major industrialised
countries, namely Germany and Japan (although disregarding Italy), in
search of sales markets, but rather to have split the world market into
two parts. First he uses the expression "disintegration", then he
specifies "that the single all-embracing world market disintegrated, so
that now we have two parallel world markets, also confronting one
another." It is clear who these two camps should be: on the one hand,
the United States, England, France and all the countries that first came
under the spell of the Marshall Plan for European "reconstruction", then
the North Atlantic Pact for "defence", better the rearmament of Europe
and the West; On the other hand, Russia, which together with the
"people's democratic countries" and China, which are exposed to a
blockade, forms a new, separate market. Geographically, this is correct,
but the wording is not very fortunate (save for the usual translation
errors). Let us assume for a moment that, on the eve of the Second World
War, there would have been a genuine, uniform world market, the trading
places of which would have been accessible to all products from all
countries, then it would not have been able to disintegrate into "two
world markets", but the world market would have ceased to exist and
would have been replaced by two international markets, separated by a
rigorous curtain which would not allow commodities and payments to pass
through (theoretically, and only according to what the customs
authorities are aware of, which is very little today). Two such markets
are now facing each other, but in parallel, indirectly admitting that
the domestic economies of the two major camps into which this globe is
divided are "parallel", i. e. of the same historical type; this is
consistent with our theoretical treatise and contradicts the thesis that
Stalin's writings are intended to put into circulation. In both camps
the market exists, ergo the commodity system, ergo the capitalist
economy. So we allow the expression of the parallel markets to pass
through, but what we completely reject is the definition according to
which there is a capitalist market in the West and a socialist one in
the East, a contradictio in adjecto[^25].

Well: Two "half-world" markets, whose dividing line, by the way -- at
least if it is about the more developed part of the populated world --
does not run on a parallel circle or latitude, but on the longitude of
the defeated Berlin. This line leads Stalin to a most remarkable
conclusion (especially when compared to the failed hypothesis of the
single world market, which would have been either under the control of a
confederation of all winning states or under the sole control of the
Western bloc led by the United States), namely, that the sphere of
exploitation of the world's resources by the major capitalist countries
(U.S.A., Britain, France) will not expand, but contract; that their
opportunities for sale in the world market" (means: on the foreign
market) "will deteriorate, and that their industries will be operating
more and more below capacity. That, in fact, is what is meant by the
deepening of the general crisis of the world capitalist system in
connection with the disintegration of the world market."

This has, of course, stirred up some dust; while various puppets have
been sent off, of the batch of an Ehrenburg or a Nenni[^26] to fight for
"peaceful coexistence" and "competition" between the parallel economic
areas, Moscow is sending the message that it is still expecting the West
to suffocate under a mountain of unsaleable commodites (which could not
even be given away because then the debts would pile up even more) and
blow up as a result of this crisis. Not even in the unbridled arms race
or in the Korean war and other imperialist raids, Moscow sees an
opportunity to save the West.

If this has shaken the bourgeoisie, it is not enough to get us Marxists
going. We have to ask what will determine such a process in the other
"parallel" camp -- on the basis of the official text we have already
shown that it is subject to the same constraints: produce more and sell
more products to the outside world. And then, as always, we must draw
the decisive conclusions from the rise of this historical movement \[of
Stalinism\] and the contradiction that we are witnessing today: On the
one hand, the posthumous attempt to "rehabilitate" Marx/Lenin's
revolutionary vision of the future -- accumulation, overproduction,
crisis, war, revolution; on the other hand, in the course of a long
period of development, to have established virtually irreversible
historical and political positions that are still persistently defended
by the "communist" parties operating in the West (which will soon be
plagued by the crisis) and diametrically contradict any unfolding of
class antagonism and the revolutionary preparation of the masses.

## Classes and States

Before the First World War, two perspectives collide. The inevitable
dispute over the markets will lead to war; regardless of who wins from
the war, imperialist tensions will persist until the proletarian
revolution or until a new global conflict: that is Lenin's
perspective. The opposite is the traitor of the working class and the
International: after the suppression of the "aggressor" (Germany), the
world will again be civilised, peaceful and open to "social
progress". Different perspectives correspond to different solutions: the
traitors call for national Burgfrieden, Lenin for revolutionary
defeatism within *each* nation.

The war was postponed until 1914, because the world market was still in
its "formation phase" in the Marxist sense. As we have shown with regard
to capitalist commodity production, the Marxist basic concept of
"creation of the world market" is based on the limited "spheres of life
and spheres of action" characterizing pre-capitalism, in which a local,
self-sufficient economy is used to produce and consume (as in the
aristocratic principalities and Asian feudal states) is dissolved in in
the single economic magma of commodity trade and sales. As long as these
"oil stains" of the autarchic economies "merge" with the universal
solvent of capitalism both internally and externally, the bourgeois
bubble of production can sustain the tempo of its "geometric" swelling
without bursting. However this is not yet the reason why these islands
will enter into a global and unified market that is free of barriers:
Protectionism is an ancient affair for the national territories, and for
the foreign trade centres discovered by seafarers it applies that the
various nations are trying to place them under their monopoly -- be it
by means of concessions from the colourful rulers and tribal princes; be
it through trading companies, such as those of the Dutch, Portuguese and
English; or be it under the protection of the war fleet and, in the
beginning, even the pirate ships of roaming "marine partisans".

In any case, according to Lenin, we are not only facing an almost
worldwide saturation, but the ones who have arrived most recently are in
a crisis on the sales markets; hence the war.

Second World War. According to Stalin, Germany's reappearance as a large
industrialized country was at the instigation of the Western powers, who
were only too happy to rearm the stronghold against Russia. In reality,
the reasons for this are primarily to be seen in the fact that the
German territory was not devastated during the war and was not occupied
by military forces after the ceasefire. In the same breath, Stalin
admits that the imperialist and economic causes, and not the "political"
and "ideological" ones, were decisive for the outbreak of the Second
World War, especially since Germany had rushed first to the West and not
to Russia. Thus it remains true that the war of 1939-45 was an
imperialist war. Consequently, there were again the two perspectives:
either new wars (irrespective of who would win) or revolution (provided
that the war would not be responded to with national "social
partnership" but with class struggle) and, in contrast, the bourgeois
perspective, identical to that of the First World War: Everything
depends on the repression of the criminal Germany; if this succeeds, the
way is clear for peace, general disarmament, freedom and prosperity of
the peoples.

Stalin is now taking up the first Leninist perspective, and puts the
imperialist cause of war and the struggle for markets in the foreground;
but it is too late for someone who yesterday threw the full potential of
the international movement onto the other perspective: the fight for the
liberation from fascism and National Socialism. Today, the
incompatibility of the two perspectives is acknowledged; but why does
one then continue to drive the (now shattered) movement on the path of
liberal and petty-bourgeois progress thinking, of "war for ideals"?

Perhaps to have a politically easy game in the next war by presenting it
as a battle between the capitalist ideal of the West and the socialist
ideal of the East? To shoot themselves into the politicians' stupid
competition, in which each camp insists on smothering the other under
the terrible accusation of "fascism"?

Now, the interesting thing about Josef Stalin's text is that he replies
to this with "no".

Completely unimpressed by his historical responsibility to have
destroyed Lenin's theory on the inevitability of wars between the
capitalist countries and on proletarian revolution as the only way out
of World War II, and equally serene in the face of the even more serious
responsibility to have broken with the only political orientation
corresponding to Lenin's theory by ordering the Communists, first in
Germany and then in France, England and America, to make "Burgfrieden"
with their own state and bourgeois government, the head of today's
Russia reprimands those comrades who believe in the necessity of an
armed clash between the "socialist" and the "capitalist" world or
demimonde. But instead of evading the prophecy of a war between
capitalism and socialism with the worn-out ideology of pacifism,
competition and the coexistence of the two worlds, he says that it is
only "theoretically" correct, that "the contradictions between
capitalism and socialism are stronger" now and in the future "than the
contradictions among the capitalist countries".

True Marxists must take seriously all possible predictions about the
contradictions within the Atlantic group of states and the resurgence of
autonomous and strong capitalisms in defeated countries such as Germany
and Japan. But Stalin's conclusion with regard to the next conflict is
to be treated with caution, since he invokes the situation on the eve of
the Second World War by analogy: "Consequently, the struggle of the
capitalist countries for markets and their desire to crush their
competitors proved in practice to be stronger than the contradictions
between the capitalist camp and the socialist camp."

What socialist camp? If, as we have shown in your own words, your
"socialist" labelled camp produces export commodities at the to be
maximally increased speed, is it not the same "struggle for markets" and
"desire to crush competitors" (or not to be crushed, which amounts to
the same thing)? Will you not and will you not have to join the war, as
producers of commodities, which in the Marxist language means: as
capitalists? The only difference between you Russians and the others is
that the fully developed industrialized countries have long since left
behind the alternative of "inner colonization" of surviving
pre-commodity producing islands while you are still going through this
process. The consequence of this can only be one thing: the western
states will squeeze you out on the ground of market competition like a
lemon (don't forget, you have accepted the movement of commodities and
money, and as long as you are at the level of competition, you also can
only take the path of low costs, meager wages and a mad rush to work for
the Russian proletariat); because it will inevitably come to war and the
others will have better "armament", they will beat you militarily after
they have done away with you economically.

So how can we proceed in order to prevent an American victory, which is
also the greatest of all evils for us? Stalin's formula is quite clever
-- but above all, it is best suited to keep the revolutionary
proletariat in stunned condition and doing the greatest service to
Atlantic imperialism. He avoids at all costs declaring the famous "holy
war", which would put him in a bad light to a world public that has been
caught up in the entertaining discussion about the aggressor; he
therefore backs out on an "economic determinism", which in no way causes
him to return to the ground of class struggle and class war (a return
that is historically impossible anyways).

The Stalinist language is rather dubious: as Lenin said, the war is
fought between the capitalist states. And what are we gonna do? Do we
call, as he did, the workers of all countries on both fronts to the
class war, to turn the guns around? Never again. We'll repeat the same
elegant maneuver we did in World War II. We are joining with one of the
two coalitions, for example France and England against the USA. In this
way, we are breaking the front line and the day will come when we will
take on the "last Mohawk" no matter whether it is a former ally or not.

Such pills are administered to the last gullible proletarians in dark
back rooms, as long as they have not yet been converted to conformism by
even worse means.

## War or Peace?

But, have many asked the supreme leader, if we now believe again in the
inevitability of war, what will happen to the huge apparatus we have
built for the peace campaign?

The answer reduces the possibility of a peace campaign to a meagre
degree. It could "result in preventing a particular war, in its
temporary postponement, in the resignation of a bellicose government"
and its replacement by a peace-keeping government (is this likely to
curb the appetite for markets, which has been presented as a decisive
fact many times before?). But "the inevitability of wars" remains. "It
is possible that in a definite conjuncture of circumstances the fight
for peace" (a democratic movement, not a class movement) "will develop
here or there into a fight for socialism." And in this case, it is no
longer a question of securing peace (which is impossible), but of
overthrowing capitalism. What will the tens of thousands of fools who
believe in world peace and "Burgfrieden" say?

To eliminate the wars and their inevitability, that is Stalin's final
sentence, "it is necessary to abolish imperialism."

Good. And how do we do that, how do we destroy imperialism?

Stalin: "In this respect, the present-day peace movement differs from
the movement of the time of the First World War for the conversion of
the imperialist war into civil war, since the latter movement went
farther and pursued socialist aims." Completely clear: Lenin's slogan
was the social civil war, i. e. the proletariat's war against the
bourgeoisie.

But you, however, have already left the Leninian way before World War II
and instead practised national "collaboration" or "partisan war"; you
have rejected the social war, defending one bourgeois and capitalist
camp against another.

So we will be attacking imperialism -- but when, in war or in peace? If
one day imperialism and capitalism fall, will it be in times of peace or
war? In peaceful times you say: Leave the USSR alone, and we will abide
strictly by the laws -- no talk of overthrowing capitalism. In times of
war you say: the times of civil war are over, the situation is no longer
that of 1914-18; the workers will have to coordinate their actions with
our respective political and military alliances with this or that
capitalist camp. That's how, country after country, the class struggle
gets smothered in mud.

Whatever nonsense the parliament and the press may say, big capital can
easily understand that Stalin's "document" is not a declaration of war,
but a life insurance policy.

## Jus primae noctis[^27]

As in his accountability reports, Stalin likes to talk about the great
deeds of the Russian government on a technical and economic level. So
now, too: one had to face a virgin ground, "in view of the absence in
the country of any ready-made rudiments of a socialist economy, it had
to create new, socialist forms of economy, "starting from scratch," so
to speak." This "unprecedented" task, Stalin says, was "accomplished
\[...\] with credit".

Well, it's true: you were facing a virgin soil. That was your fortune
and the misfortune of the proletarian revolution outside Russia. A
revolution -- no matter which kind it may be in history -- then storms
forward with full force when it only has to do with the obstacles of a
wild, merciless but untouched ground.

But when, in the years following the conquest of power in the vast
tsarist empire, the delegates of the Red Proletariat of the whole world
met in the Kremlin's baroque gold-plated halls to set the guidelines for
that revolution which was supposed to destroy the imperial fortresses of
the Western bourgeoisies, something essential was said in vain, not even
Lenin understood it[^28]. If, therefore, the balance sheet of the large
dams and power stations, the balance sheet of the colonisation of the
vast steppes, is concluded with honour, the balance sheet of the
revolution in the capitalist West was not only concluded dishonourable,
which would not be the worst, but with a defeat from which it would not
recover for decades to come.

What has been said in vain: in the bourgeois world, the world of
Christian parliamentary civilisation and production of commodities, the
revolution faces a prostitute ground.

You let it contaminate itself and die of it.

But even from this dark experience IT will arise again.

[^1]: Refers to Stalin: "Marxism and Problems of Linguistics", 1950,
	Criticized in "The Factors of Race and Nation in Marxist Theory" (I
	fattori di razza e nazione nella teoria marxista), Il programma
	comunista, No. 16-20, 1953.

[^2]: Quod differtur, non aufertur (lat.): postponed is not cancelled.

[^3]: Stalin: Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR, 1952

[^4]: Barbariccia:"curly beard", one of the devil's names in Dante's
	"Divine Comedy": "Hell", 21st chant, where verse 139 says: "and he
	used his butt as a trumpet".

[^5]: The theoretical organ of the communist left in Italy has been
	called "Battaglia comunista" since 1945; after the split in 1951,
	the organ of the movement to which Amadeo Bordiga belonged was
	called "Il programma comunista".

[^6]: Confession: Bordiga means that the economic and social structure
	of Russia will force Russian politicians to admit (the present paper
	dates from 1952) that "socialism" in Russia is nothing more than
	capitalism, even if they do not formulate it explicitly.

[^7]: All quotes marked with "Stalin" are taken from: "Economic Problems
	of Socialism in the USSR". 1952.

[^8]: V.I. Lenin: „Karl Marx", 1914, Lenin's Collected Works, Moscow,
	1974, Volume 21, pp. 43-91.

[^9]: See among others: Filo 92,"In the Vortex of Capitalist Anarchy";
	Battaglia comunista, no. 9, May 1952, where the Marx chapter: "The
	Fetishism of Commodities and the Secret thereof" is taken as a
	basis.

[^10]: The 19th Party Congress of the CPSU took place in October 1952
	and coincided with the economic debate discussed here.

[^11]: State industrialism here means that the state is the owner of the
industry which it also manages and administers, while agriculture is
hardly affected at all (except for the small part of the
Soviets). For Lenin, state capitalism was the highest goal that the
proletariat's dictatorship could set itself in anticipation of the
international revolution. It was to serve as a lever for the
transformation of agriculture, which remained at the level of
small-scale and patriarchal natural production. The Stalinist
counterrevolution maintained state leadership and property rights in
industry (without excluding private forms of enterprise), but in
agriculture, in the form of the collective farm, it fortified a mode
of production that was even far below the state capitalist level.

[^12]: See: Karl Marx, Capital Volume I, 1867, Chapter 6, p. 123.

[^13]: Allusion to the closing sequence of each fairy tale from
"Thousand and One Nights". Scheherazade is the narrator's
name. Through her narrative, the clever Scheherezade captivates a
king who intends to kill her. She spins the fairy tales from night
to night, through 1001 nights, and achieves that life is given to
her.

[^14]: Malenkov (1902-88): Member of the Politburo. After Stalin's
death, the prime minister was removed from his post in February
1955, after a failed "coup attempt" against Khrushchev in
July 1957. He then became director of an electricity plant in
Kazakhstan.

[^15]: Stachanov movement: another attempt to increase labour
productivity and establish the piecework wage. For Stalin, she
prepared the "transition from socialism to communism". But soon
enough, however, the Stachanovists ("heroes of labor") seemed to
have a rather inhibiting effect on productivity, and so they were
gradually "dismantled" as leading political figures. See also
Trotsky: the Stachanov movement in "The Revolution Betrayed ".

[^16]: Artel: an old form of peasant, cooperative union of Tatar origin;
it served Stalin as the basis of the collective farm.

[^17]: The 26 years refer to the year 1925, when Zinoviev had given the
Italian communists the slogan: "Long live freedom! In 1952 at the
19th Party Congress, Stalin said: "The flag of national independence
and sovereignty was thrown overboard \[by the bourgeoisie\]. There
is no doubt that you, the representatives of the communist and
democratic parties, will have to lift this flag and carry it forward
if you want to be patriots, if you want to become the leader of the
nation. You are the only one who can pick them up ".

[^18]: Allusion to Bukharin and Bogdanov.

[^19]: "As long ago as 1844 I stated that the above-mentioned balancing
of useful effects and expenditure of labour on making decisions
concerning production was all that would be left, in a communist
society, of the politico-economic concept of
value. (Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher, p. 95) The scientific
justification for this statement, however, as can be seen, was made
possible only by Marx's Capital." -- Friedrich Engels, Anti-Dühring,
1877

[^20]: Lenin: Remarks on Nikolai Bukharin's "Economy of the
Transformation Period", 1981.

[^21]: In this context, Stalin puts the word "commodity" in quotation
marks. He proposes to replace the term "commodity delivery" with
"product exchange" and suggests that the "transition from socialism
to communism" would mean narrowing the scope of circulation of
commodities and broadening that of product exchange.

[^22]: L' apres-midi d' une faune: "The Afternoon of a Faun"; music by
Debussy.

[^23]: Laissez faire, laissez passer (French): "Laissez faire, laissez
passer, le monde va de lui-même" ("Let it happen, let it pass, the
world will go on on its own"), a statement by Vincent de Gournay
(1712-59), attributed to a French economist. Applies as a buzzword
of economic liberalism, as an invitation to the state power not to
intervene in economic processes.

[^24]: Kesselring: from 1941-45 commander-in-chief of the Wehrmacht in
Italy and North Africa.

[^25]: Contradictio in adjecto (lat.): Contradiction in itself.

[^26]: Ehrenburg: Russian writer. Apologete of peaceful coexistence and
the "thaw". Nenni: Secretary General of PSI. Otherwise see
Ehrenburg.

[^27]: Jus primae noctis (lat.): "Right to the first night"; the right
of the feudal lord to the first night with the newlyweds of his
serf.

[^28]: Amadeo Bordiga refers to the discussions of the first Comintern
congresses on tactics to be used in the capitalist countries, which
are no longer "virgin" but rather overripe. The Italian left has
emphasised the danger of an "elastic" tactic towards the social
democratic parties, particularly with regard to the tactics of the
political (non-union!) united front and a common workers government
with these parties. The Left considered that the young Communist
parties should not compromise themselves by acting in concert with
social democratic or similar parties, while other delegates and the
Bolsheviks argued that they should first gather all forces to "sift"
at a later date.
