---
title: The Revolutionary Program of Communist Society Eliminates All Forms of Ownership of Land, the Instruments of Production and the Products of Labor
author: Bordiga, Amadeo
date: 1958
description: Written by Bordiga as a member of the Partito Comunista Internazionale for publication in Il Programma Comunista no. 16, September 3-17, 1958. It was then translated into Spanish in 1981, and thence into English in 2013. Found in English at <https://libcom.org/library/revolutionary-program-communist-society-eliminates-all-forms-ownership-land-instruments-> - Spanish available at <http://sinistra.net/lib/upt/elproc/moqe/moqefkibus.html>.
...

## Engels and the Agrarian Programs of the Socialist Parties[^fn-1]

In September 1894, at its Nantes Congress, the French Workers Party (the
party of Guesde and Lafargue) adopted an agrarian action program. In
October, in Frankfurt am Main, the German Social Democratic Party of
Engels was engaged in addressing the same issue; near the end of his
long life, Engels remained in contact with the movement of the Second
International, founded in 1889, after the death of Marx. He expressed
his vehement objections to the French resolution, while he was more
satisfied with the German Congress, where a right wing tendency similar
to the one that prevailed at Nantes was rejected.

Engels dedicated an article to this topic that is of the utmost
importance, published in the journal _Die Neue Zeit_ in November 1894. A
somewhat unfaithful translation of this article was published in the
November 1955 issue of the Stalinist journal, _Cahiers du Communisme_.
The editors of this journal say in their preface to the text that a
packet of correspondence of great interest between Engels and Lafargue
was discovered in the house of a descendant of Marx (Lafargue was his
son-in-law). In these letters, Engels did not try to hide his
disapproval, and his formulations are truly important; only the
Stalinists would have the gall to write a preface to a historical
document that so blatantly exposes them.

You--he says with true bitterness, despite the seriousness of his tone,
the old Engels addressing Lafargue--you, the intransigent
revolutionaries of yesterday, have taken a little more to opportunism
than the Germans. In a later letter, Engels stresses that he wrote his
critical article in a friendly spirit, but did not hesitate to repeat
that, "you have allowed yourself to be dragged too far down the slippery
slope of opportunism." These quotations are also useful in order to show
just how far back the terminology of our discussion goes, to which we
have always granted the greatest importance. Even before the death of
Engels, the left wing Marxists (who, at the Congress of Rouen in 1882,
had split from the "Possibilists", who advocated participation in the
ministries of bourgeois governments) defined themselves as intransigent
revolutionaries, and the same term was adopted, in the first decade of
this century, by the left fraction of the Italian Socialist Party, which
was opposed to the reformism of Turati and the possibilism of Bissolati,
and from which the Communist Party was born after a subsequent process
of realignments and splits.

The word, opportunism, which many young people think was first coined by
Lenin in the indomitable battle he waged during the First World War, had
already been employed by Engels and Marx in their writings. On other
occasions we have noted that, semantically, it is not the most
felicitous expression, since it is susceptible to being interpreted as a
moral judgment, rather than a social-deterministic one. Nonetheless, the
word has the historical right of precedence, and in our view expresses
what is despicable and depraved as opposed to what is healthy in
Marxism.

In that letter written in order to "deal considerately" with Lafargue,
whose revolutionary credentials were beyond reproach, Engels provided a
definition of right wing opportunism that was as sharp as a razor. In
the sentence in which he says, "you have gone too far down the slippery
slope of opportunism", he also writes the following words:

"In Nantes, you are on the road to sacrificing the future of the Party
for one day's success."

This definition is still relevant: opportunism is the method that
sacrifices the future of the Party for one day's success. Those who have
practiced it, then and now, are disgraceful!

Now is the time to get to the crux of the problem and take a look at
Engels' text. He concluded that, for the French, there was still time to
stop and he hoped that his article would help them to do so. But where
are the French (and the Italians) of 1958?

## Socialists and the Peasantry in the late 1800s

Before we proceed to a study of Engels we shall sketch a picture of the
general situation of the agricultural population of Europe during his
time. The bourgeois parties had always judged that the socialist
movement would have to develop only in the milieu of the urban
industrial workers, and were surprised when the peasant question found a
place on the agendas of all the socialist parties of the time. The
response of Engels is relevant to every stage, such as, for example,
when we demonstrate that right in the middle of the twentieth century
the social questions of the countries of color and the industrially
undeveloped countries cannot be constrained within the rigid dualism,
capitalists-proletarians, but, always and everywhere, Marxism must have
doctrinal and practical answers for the whole multi-class, rather than
two-class, panorama of society.

Engels is in a position to allow only two exceptions to the fundamental
presence of one large class of peasants who are not wage workers or
entrepreneurs: Great Britain and Prussia east of the Elbe. Only in those
two regions had the owners of large landed estates and big industrial
agriculture totally liquidated the small farmer who worked for himself.
We shall observe that even in these two exceptional cases, there are
three classes (as always in Marx, even when he addresses the question of
a model bourgeois society): urban or rural wage labor, industrial or
agrarian capitalist, and bourgeois, rather than feudal, landowner.

In all other countries, for Engels and for every Marxist, "the peasant
is a very essential factor of the population, production and political
power". Therefore no one can say that the peasants, as far as I am
concerned, do not exist, as an excuse, or that the movements of the
colonial peoples, as far as I am concerned, do not exist.[^fn-2]

That the theory of the function of these social classes, however, and
the way the Marxist party should approach them, should be a copy of the
corresponding positions of the petty-bourgeois democracy, is the other
outrage against which Engels unsheathed one of his "corrections". We
must however say that this second position is just another way of
formulating the same outrage.

Since only a mental defective could doubt the statistical weight of the
peasants in terms of demography and the economy, Engels rapidly touched
on the sore spot: what is its impact as a factor in the political
struggle?

The conclusion is obvious: most of the time, the peasants have only
demonstrated their apathy, based on their isolated lives in rural areas.
But this apathy is not itself without effects:

"This apathy on the part of the great mass of the population is the
strongest pillar not only of the parliamentary corruption in Paris and
Rome but also Russian despotism." Not we, but Engels, mentioned Rome,
and he did so no less than 64 years ago.

Engels showed that since the birth of the workers movement in the
cities, the bourgeoisie had never ceased to galvanize the peasant
landowners against the workers movement, depicting the socialists as
those who would abolish property, and the same thing was done by the
landowners who rented out their lands, who pretended to have a common
interest to defend alongside the small peasant landowner.

Must the industrial proletariat accept as inevitable the fact that, in
the conquest of political power, the whole peasant class will be an
active ally of the bourgeoisie that also must be defeated? Engels
introduced the Marxist perspective on this question, rapidly admitting
that such a perspective must be condemned, and is just as useless for
the cause of the revolution as well as that of the proletariat that will
thus never be able to conquer before the disappearance of all the
intermediate classes.

In France, history has taught us--as is incomparably presented in the
classical texts of Karl Marx--that the peasants, with their weight in
society, have always tipped the scales of confrontations in favor of the
side that was opposed to the interests of the working class, in the
First and Second Empires and against the Paris revolutions of 1831,
1848-1849 and 1871.

How, then, can this relation of forces be shifted in favor of the
workers? How should we address the small peasant landowners and what
should we promise them? Now we are at the heart of the agrarian problem.
But the goal of Engels is to discredit as anti-Marxist and
counterrevolutionary any defense of the preservation of small-scale
property. What would the venerable and great Frederick have said if
someone had proposed, as they are doing today in Italy and France[^fn-3], that the
agrarian program must advocate the extension, over the entire rural
population, of the ownership of all the land that is under cultivation?

## The French Programs

Already in 1892, at the Marseilles Congress, the French Workers Party
had drafted an agrarian program (this was the year when the anarchists
split from the socialist party in Italy and the Italian Socialist Party
was founded in Genoa).

This first program is not subject to the same degree of condemnation on
the part of Engels as the Nantes program, because the latter program, as
we shall see below, had misappropriated theoretical principles for the
purpose of obtaining the support of the party for the immediate
interests of the small peasant landowners. In Marseilles the party
limited itself to suggesting practical goals for agitation among the
peasants (at the time it defended the famous distinction between the
maximum and the minimum program, which later led to the whole historical
crisis of the socialist parties). Engels highlighted the fact that the
demands made on behalf of the small peasant landowners--those which, at
the time, were more attentive to the demands of the sharecroppers than
to the working landowners--were so modest that other parties had already
proposed them and that many bourgeois governments had already
implemented them. Wholesale purchasing cooperatives formed by rural
municipalities for the acquisition of machinery, favored by the state so
that central garages and depots could be established, prohibition of the
seizure of the harvest by the landowner for non-payment of debts,
revision of land assessments, and so on....

The list of demands made on behalf of the agrarian wage workers is given
even less consideration by Engels; some are obvious, because they are
the same as for the industrial workers, like a minimum wage; others are
tolerable, such as the establishment, on municipal land (municipal
property), of agricultural production cooperatives.

This program, however, led the party to such significant electoral
success in the elections of 1893 that, on the eve of the next Congress,
some elements in the party sought to continue to push ahead on the road
of championing the interests of the peasants. There was nonetheless a
feeling that this was dangerous ground, so they wanted to pave the way
by drafting a theoretical preamble that would show that there was no
contradiction between the maximum socialist program and the protection
of the small peasant landowner, and even the protection of his property
rights! It is at this point that Engels, after having summarized the
program's contents, directed the full force of his critique. They
wanted, he said, "to prove that it is in keeping with the principles of
socialism to protect small-peasant property from destruction by the
capitalist mode of production, although one is perfectly aware that this
destruction is inevitable".

The preamble's first premise says that, considered in terms of the
general program of the party, the producers will not be free until they
possess the means of production. The second premise says that, if in the
industrial domain one can foresee the restitution of the means of
production to the producers in a collective or social form, in the
agricultural domain, at least in France, the means of production, the
land, is in most cases individually possessed by the worker.

The third premise says that whereas peasant property "is irretrievably
doomed", "socialism" must not, however, "hasten its doom, as its task
does not consist in separating property from labor", but, to the
contrary, "in uniting both of these factors of all production by placing
them in the same hands".

The fourth premise says that, considering the fact that just as the
industrial premises must be seized from the private capitalists in order
to hand them over to the workers, so also, and in just the same way, the
large landed estates must be given to the agricultural proletarians and
therefore it is always the duty of "socialism" "to maintain the peasants
themselves tilling their patches of land in possession of the same as
against the [tax collector], the usurer, and the encroachments of the
newly-arisen big landowners".

The fifth premise was the one that Engels found most scandalous: while
the first four created a tremendous doctrinal confusion, the fifth one
directly annihilates the concept of the class struggle: "it is expedient
to extend this protection also to the producers who as tenants or
sharecroppers (_metayers_) cultivate the land owned by others and who,
if they exploit day laborers, are to a certain extent compelled to do so
because of the exploitation to which they themselves are subjected".

## The Unfortunate Conclusion

From the above premises arose the practical program that is intended "to
bring together all the elements of rural production, all occupations
which by virtue of various rights and titles utilise the national soil,
to wage an identical struggle against the common foe: the feudality of
landownership".

Here, as Engels demonstrated, although with the obvious intention not to
treat old self-professed Marxists like idiots, all historical
differentiations are thrown overboard, confusing, in the France of 1894,
the feudal landowners, annihilated a century before by the Great
Revolution, not with the large capitalist landlords, the industrialists
of agriculture, towards whom today's national-communist traitors
directly issue invitations to join a broad-based bloc, because they
improve the soil (!), but with the bourgeois agrarian landowners, who do
not engage in administration or management of the agricultural estate,
but who live off the rent paid by the petty tenant farmers or large
landlords. This third class of capitalist society has nothing to do with
the old feudal nobility; the former bought its territorial goods with
money, and can sell them, since "the bourgeois revolution transformed
the land into an article of commerce"; the latter (that is, the feudal
class) had an inalienable right not only over the land, but also over
the workers who populated it. Engels would remind these sluggish
disciples that a bloc did arise, "for a certain time and for definite
purposes", against this feudal class, but it is clear that in this
historical bloc--whose heyday in France was in the remote past and in
Russia was still underway--it was these same "bourgeois landlords" who
took part.

Such a noxious error still beclouds the European proletarian horizon due
to the triumphant opportunism of Stalinism. The doctrinal weapons to
counteract its ruinous effects do not have to be sought in the data
supplied by the period that has elapsed since 1894, but in the very same
arsenal that Engels utilized in his text on the peasant question.

This agrarian policy, totally subordinated to coalition politics, kills
the class struggle, and insofar as it is implemented by the same party
that embraces the factory workers it kills it exclusively for the
benefit of the industrial capitalists, and guarantees the survival of
the bourgeois form of society until these elephantine parties are
destroyed.

Continuing in the doctrinal vein, before we consider the political side
of the question, it is necessary to make another equally pessimistic
observation, one that would be pointless to omit, consisting in the fact
that today, unlike the situation in 1894, opportunism is not at the
stage of posing a threat; it has already sucked all the energy from the
working class. Many--almost all--of the groups that challenge the big
Stalinist or post-Stalinist parties, and which have split from them,
have demonstrated that they have ideas concerning the "_contenu du
socialisme_" that are just as un-Marxist as those presented in the
Nantes Program (since our narrative relates to France, we shall refer to
the group, "Socialisme ou Barbarie"). We would have said anti-Marxist if
we were not in the presence of the sober discourse of Frederick Engels,
who, evidently, knew from experience, and from the effects of many sharp
reprimands from Papa Marx, that the French do not like to be _choqué_
(wounded), and that they do not even like to be _froissé_ (offended). In
the first instance they assume the visage of a D'Artagnan, in the second
that of a Talleyrand, as was the case later with Frossard (a world
champion of un-Marxism) at the Second Congress of the Communist
International. And this person dared to call himself a Marxist in front
of Lenin!

## A Series of False Formulas

False formulations are extremely useful for the purpose of clarifying
the real "content" of the modern revolutionary program. The old social
ideologies assumed a mystical form, but were nonetheless still
condensations of the human experience of the species, of the same nature
as the most highly developed notions attained in the era of capitalism
and in the struggle to overthrow it. We could say that the old mysticism
assumed the form of a series of affirmative theses. Modern mysticism,
the norm of action of the destructive forces of contemporary society, is
instead organized in a series of negative theses. The degree of
consciousness of the future, which cannot be attained by the individual
but only by the revolutionary party, is forged in a more expressive
way--at least until a society without classes has become a reality--in a
series of norms of this kind: don't say this--don't do that.

We hope to present in a modest and accessible form an edifying result
that is the product of some rather arduous labors. With this goal in
mind, we shall proceed to examine, following in the footsteps of Engels,
the master of this method, the mistaken formulas of the Nantes premises.

Engels began by saying, concerning the first premise, that it is not
correct to deduce the formula, "that freedom of the producers
presupposes the possession of the means of production", from our general
program.

This same French program immediately adds that this possession is only
possible in the form of individual possession--which has never been
generalized and which industrial development is making increasingly more
impossible--or in the form of possession in common, the preconditions
for which have been created by the stabilization of capitalist society.
The only goal of socialism, in that case, said Engels, is "the common
possession of the means of production".

Engels considered it to be of great importance to emphasize the fact
that no conquest or preservation of individual possession of the means
of production on the part of the producers can possibly be a goal of the
socialist program. And he adds:

"Not only in industry, where the ground has already been prepared, but
in general, hence also in agriculture."

This is a fundamental thesis for the entire classical corpus of Marxism.
The proletarian party--unless it has openly declared that it is
revisionist--cannot advocate or defend for even one second, a form of
unity between the worker and his means of labor that is achieved on an
individual scale, in subdivided personal allotments. The text under
examination here repeats this again and again.

Engels also refutes the concept expressed in the erroneous formula
concerning the "freedom" of the producer. This freedom is by no means
assured by these hybrid forms, bound up with contemporary society, in
which the producer possesses the land as well as a share of his
instruments of production. In today's economy, these factors are quite
precarious and are not guaranteed for the small peasant proprietor. The
bourgeois revolution has undoubtedly conferred upon him the benefit of
freeing him from his feudal bonds, and from the personal servitude of
giving a feudal lord part of his labor time or a share of his products.
But this freedom in no way guarantees, with the advent of an era when
everyone gets his little plot of land, that he will not be separated
from the latter in a hundred ways, which Engels enumerates together with
the concrete part of the program, but which are inseparable from the
essence of capitalist society: taxation, mortgage debt, destruction of
rural domestic industry, foreclosures and seizures to the point of total
expropriation. No legislative measure (reform) will be capable of
preventing the peasant from spontaneously selling everything he owns,
including his land, rather than letting himself die of hunger. Here, the
critique of Engels verges on invective: "Your attempt to protect the
small peasant in his property does not protect his liberty but only the
particular form of his servitude; it prolongs a situation in which he
can neither live nor die."

## The False Chimera of Freedom

We shall denounce the diseased formula of the first premise, which, from
one error leads to another greater error, with less generosity than was
displayed by the great Engels; we do not have a Paul Lafargue before us,
in whom Marxism has momentarily gone dormant and who only needs to be
reawakened, but a despicable gang of traitors and defeatists whose souls
are already damned.

The premise seems to respond to this question: when will the producers
be free? And it responds: when they are not separated from their means
of production. It is this slippery slope that leads to the idealization
of an impossible and impoverished society of small peasant landowners
and artisans, and the master did not desist from hurling the bitter
accusation of reactionary at this position, since such a society is much
more backwards than the society of proletarians and capitalists. The
error, however, one that is completely metaphysical and idealist, which
has completely erased any determinist and historical-dialectical
perspective, consists in that of assuming a stupid position, professed
today by many self-proclaimed "leftists" on both sides of the Atlantic,
i.e.: socialism is a struggle for the individual liberation of the
worker. This premise embeds certain economic theories within the
framework of a philosophy of Freedom.

We repudiate such a starting point: it is stupidly bourgeois and only
leads to the degeneration whose spectacle is unfolding throughout the
world in the form of Stalinism. The formula would be no less of a
distortion if one were to speak of the collective liberation of the
producers. For it is a matter of establishing the limits of this
collectivity, and it is on this reef that all the "immediatists"
founder, as we shall see below. The domain enclosed by these limits is
so vast that it must include manufacturing and agriculture and every
form of human activity in general. When human activity, which embraces
much more than production, a term that is linked to bourgeois society,
has no limits in its collective dynamic, nor any temporal limit between
generation and generation, it will be understood that the postulate of
Freedom was a transitory and obsolete bourgeois ideology, and then we
shall be able to say that it was once dangerous but is now soporific and
false.

## Property and Labor

In the third premise mentioned above, its proponents thought they could
base their arguments on something as incontestable as the fact that the
mission of socialism consists in uniting, rather than separating,
property and labor. Engels did not want to be too vicious, but he
repeated that, "the latter in this general form is by no means the task
of socialism. Its task is, rather, only to transfer the means of
production to the producers as their _common possession_".

If one loses sight of this fact, Engels said, it is clear that one
"imposes upon socialism the imperative duty to carry out something which
it had declared to be impossible in the preceding paragraph. It charges
it to 'maintain' the small-holding ownership of the peasants although it
itself states that this form of ownership is 'irretrievably doomed'".

Here we must dig even deeper, mindful of all the Marxian-Engelsian
precepts and our whole doctrine. Above all, the question of this
"separation" is not metaphysical, but historical. It is not a matter of
just saying that the bourgeoisie has separated property from the worker
and that we, intending to rectify this, will reunite them. This would be
pure foolishness. Marxism has never depicted, in the revolution and in
bourgeois societies, a process of separation of property from labor, but
a process of the separation of the men who labor from the conditions of
their labor. Property is a historical-juridical category. The
aforementioned separation is a relation between very real elements and
materials: on the one side, the men who labor; and on the other, the
possibility of having access to the land and to the use of the tools of
labor. Feudal servitude and slavery united these two elements in a very
simple way: they imprisoned both elements in the same concentration
camp, from which a portion of the products (another concrete, physical
element) was extracted at the whim of the ruling class. The bourgeois
revolution broke up this self-enclosed circle and said to the workers:
you are free to leave; then the circle was once again closed and the
separation we are discussing was carried out. The ruling class cut the
barbed wire and monopolized the conditions of production, keeping the
whole product: the serfs who fled to hunger and impotence are still
paying homage to the miracle of Freedom!

Socialism seeks to abolish, for everyone (individual, group, class or
state), the possibility of being surrounded by barbed wire; but this
cannot be expressed with the meaningless phrase, reunite property and
labor! It means that socialism works to bring about the end and final
destruction of bourgeois property and wage labor, the final and worst of
all servitudes.

When the text of the Nantes Program then says that labor and property
are the two factors of production, whose separation leads to servitude
and poverty for the proletarians, it commits a yet greater outrage.
Property as a factor of production! Here Marxism is forgotten and
completely renounced. In the description of the capitalist mode of
production, the central thesis of Marxism is that there is only one
factor of production, and that is human labor. Landed property, and
property in the form of tools and buildings, is not another factor of
production. To call them factors of production is to regress to the
trinity formula that was annihilated by Marx in the third volume of
_Capital_: this trinity formula maintains that wealth has three sources:
land, capital and labor, and this vulgar doctrine justifies the three
forms of distribution: rents, profits and wages. The socialist and
communist party is the historical form in struggle against the rule of
the capitalist class, the class whose doctrine holds that capital, with
just as much right as labor, is a factor of production. In order to
trace the doctrine that defends the right of the third term, the third
factor of production, we have to go even further back in time, beyond
Ricardo, to the Physiocrats of the feudal era, whose doctrine provided
the historical justification (pay a little attention here) for precisely
the hated rule of the feudal lords!

To reunite the land with labor is therefore a grave Marxist heresy, and
this is just as true with regard to collective labor as it is for the
individual laborer.

## Industrial and Agrarian Enterprise

It is precisely the slippery fourth premise that contains the trap of
the defense of the small plot of cultivated land, a defense that is
based on the comparison of the big industries that "must be seized from
their lazy owners", that is, the urban bourgeoisie (who were not so
lazy, however, during the times of the "_Maître des Forges_"), with the
large landed estates that must be "collectively or socially" handed over
to the agricultural proletarians. In a later passage, Engels makes a
very different comparison between the socialist and revolutionary
expropriation of the factory owner and that affecting the agrarian
landowner. The Nantes Program, besides the fact that it did not
elaborate on the essential distinction between "collective" and "social"
management, a question that it barely addresses, sidesteps the no less
important distinction between large landed estates or large scale
landownership and large scale industrial agriculture. Where the
management of a unit of production based on wage labor constitutes a
single form of technical exploitation--even when part of the wage is
paid not in money form but in the form of products--a form that Marx
defined as a medieval remnant and which is "protected" by the Italian
Togliattian "Marxists" in order to more closely bind the rural
proletariat to the wretched form of ownership of little parcels of
land--then there is no reason not to treat this productive unit the same
way we would treat the factory of Mr. Krupp, to employ the example used
by Engels. Difficulties arise, however, when there is a large rural
property owned by a single individual, which is nonetheless divided into
a large number of separate parcels cultivated by many technically
independent family-based units, composed of small sharecroppers and
tenant farmers. In this case, expropriation will not possess the
historical character of the expropriation of large concentrated
industry, but will be reduced--if feudal forms still survive, as was the
case in Russia in 1917--to a liberation of glebe serfs that will not yet
surpass the inferior condition of the distribution of many small plots
of land. In a consolidated bourgeois regime, such as the French regime
of the late 19th century, the programmatic formula must not be limited,
in the opinion of Engels, to the transformation of the tenant farmers
who pay their rents in money or in kind into "free" worker-landowners;
the socialist parties must resolutely propose as a goal for the
peasants--those who can be accepted by the party and those who are under
its influence--the formation of agricultural production cooperatives
under unitary management, which is also a transitional form insofar as
it will have to be gradually transformed into "co-operative, large-scale
production", "under the control of the community". This formula is
employed by Engels to stigmatize, with proper severity, any inclusion in
the program--even the immediate program--of any partition of large
landed property and its distribution among the peasants in order to
reduce it to so many small individual or family parcels.

Concerning this point another consideration must be added--a
consideration that must be linked to other Marxist texts--with regard to
the destination point of the socialist program. The collective
management of enterprises that have already been unified under the
ownership of the bourgeoisie could be conceived as a transitory
expedient if one thinks about the collectivity of the workers of the
enterprise as the subject of such management. But such a consideration
must not cause one to think that socialism is fulfilled with the
replacement of capitalist or individual ownership of the factory (which
is today collective in the form of corporations) by collective working
class ownership. In the correct formulation of this position, the word
we encounter is not ownership [property], but possession, that of the
taking of possession of the means of production, and even more
correctly, that of the exploitation, of management, of direction, to
which terms we have to add the exact subject. The expression, social
management, is better than cooperative management, while it would be
completely bourgeois rather than socialist to refer to "cooperative
ownership". The term, national management, can be used to attempt to
express the hypothesis that the expropriation of the industrial means of
production and the land might be carried out in one country but not in
another, but it recalls state management, which is nothing but a form of
state capitalist ownership of enterprises.

While we are still discussing agriculture, we would like to make it
clear that--according to the communist program--the land and the means
of production must pass into the hands of society, society organized on
new foundations, foundations that can no longer be called commodity
production. Consequently, the land and the rural productive apparatus
pass into the hands of all the workers as a whole, whether industrial or
agricultural workers, and the same is true of the industrial plant. It
is only in this sense that one can interpret Marx when he speaks of the
abolition of the differences between city and country, and of the
overcoming of the social division of labor, as pillars of communist
society. The old propaganda slogans: the factories to the workers and
the land to the peasants, and those of an even more insipid variety--the
ships to the sailors--even though they are all-too-often employed even
in recent times, are nothing but a parody of the formidable power of the
Marxist revolutionary program.

## The Most Extreme Aberration

Before we proceed to explore other texts by Marx for early anticipations
of the principles we have just recalled, we shall conclude our
comprehensive examination of the study published by Engels with a
reference to his indignation, because it is so relevant to our time, at
the last of the five premises, the one that attributes to the party the
duty to help the peasant sharecroppers and tenant farmers exploit wage
labor! We shall pass over the subtle destructive critique directed by
Engels at the details of the Nantes Program, which include reform
measures that either have no chance of being implemented or else would
lead the peasants themselves to the very condition that had constituted
the origin of their poverty and brutalization, in France and elsewhere,
by the misuse of the lever with which those who drafted the Nantes
Program sought to mobilize the peasantry.

We shall also omit the final part about Germany, where, fortunately, the
party had not committed similar mistakes, and where it was demonstrated
that the party had to rely on the dispossessed peasantry of the east,
semi-serfs of the Prussian Junkers, instead of the peasantry of the
west, which was devoid of any revolutionary potential.

We are disappointed not to have found any reference in this text by
Engels to Italy, where during that time the party, with a high degree of
class consciousness, led the struggle of the agricultural day laborers,
in the Romagna and Apulia, for example, against the wealthy bourgeois
tenant farmers, a struggle that assumed the most violent forms,
embodying what Engels presents as the correct goal, that is, that the
peasant wage workers should be in the socialist party and the tenant
farmers and sharecroppers should be in some other, petty bourgeois
party, which in Italy was the Republican Party. Today, meanwhile, to the
contrary, the "communists" are pursuing the same policy that was
shamefully incorporated into the French program of 1894, that is,
crushing the class struggle of the wage-workers employed by the middle
class peasants and sharecroppers, as we have mentioned.

The words of Engels apply to today's traitors:

"Here, we are entering upon ground that is passing strange. Socialism is
particularly opposed to the exploitation of wage labor. And here it is
declared to be the imperative duty of socialism to protect the French
tenants when they 'exploit day laborers', as the text literally states!
And that because they are compelled to do so to a certain by 'the
exploitation to which they themselves are subjected'!

"How easy and pleasant it is to keep on coasting once you are on the
toboggan slide! (Oh, father Engels, you could not imagine the extremes
to which this lust for demagogic success and betrayal has
gone!--[Bordiga's interpolation].) When now the big and middle peasants
of Germany come to ask the French Socialists to intercede with the
German Party Executive to get the German Social-Democratic Party to
protect them in the exploitation of their male and female farm servants,
citing in support of the contention the 'exploitation to which they
themselves are subjected' by usurers, tax collectors, grain speculators
and cattle dealers, what will they answer? What guarantee have they that
our agrarian big landlords will not send them Count Kanitz (as he also
submitted a proposal like theirs, providing for a state monopoly of
grain importation) and likewise ask for socialist protection of their
exploitation of the rural workers, citing in support 'the exploitation
to which they themselves are subjected' by stock-jobbers, money lender,
and grain speculators?"

We may conclude with one last quotation concerning the peasants and
their relevance to the party that truly constitutes a rule that we must
never forget:

"I flatly deny that the socialist workers' party of any country is
charged with the task of taking into its fold, in addition to the rural
proletarians and the small peasants, also the idle and big peasants and
perhaps even the tenants of the big estates, the capitalist cattle
breeders and other capitalist exploiters of the national soil.... We can
use in our Party individuals from every class of society, but have no
use whatever for any groups representing capitalist, middle-bourgeois,
or middle-peasant interests."

This is how to defend the party, its nature, its doctrine which is not
for sale, its revolutionary future! And this is why the political party
is the only form that can prevent the degeneration of the class struggle
of the urban and rural proletariat of all countries.

## Marx's Great Pronouncement

Our French comrades brought to us in Turin a text by Marx whose note on
publication is as follows:

"This manuscript, found after the death of Karl Marx in his archives, is
possibly an addendum to the work on the nationalization of the land that
Marx had written at the request of Applegarth. This work has remained
undiscovered until now. The title of the notebook is 'On the
Nationalization of the Land'."

This welcome development comes to the aid of our modest reiteration that
Marxism does not modify the forms of property, but radically negates the
appropriation of the land. We shall begin by quoting a theoretically
less-difficult passage:

"At the International Congress in Brussels, in 1868, one of my friends
said (this was the First International and the way he expresses himself
indicates that he was not a Bakuninist libertarian--[Bordiga's note]):
'Small private property is doomed by the verdict of science; great
private property by justice. There remains then but one alternative. The
soil must become the property of rural associations, or the property of
the whole nation. The future will decide the question.' I say, on the
contrary: 'The future will decide that the land can only be owned
nationally. To give up the soil to the hands of associated rural
laborers would be to surrender all society to one exclusive class of
producers'."

The content of this brief note is vast in its scope. Above all, it
proves that it is not in accordance with Marxism to dispose of difficult
questions by referring them to the revelation and decision of future
history. Marxism knows quite well, from its beginnings, how to
definitively resolve the essential characteristics of the future
society, and explicitly enunciates them.

Secondly, the terms, national and nationally, are only adopted for the
purposes of engaging in a Socratic dialogue with the first formulation.
In the positive thesis he speaks of transference and not of property;
not of the nation, but of all of society.

Finally, one may further explicate the proposition, which is so
masterful in the highest sense of the term, in the following way: The
socialist program is not expressed as either the abolition of the
surrender of a sector of the productive means to a class of individuals,
or to a minority of non-producers who live in leisure. The socialist
program demands that no sector of production should be ruled by any
single class, not even a class of producers, but by all of society. As a
result, the land will not be transferred to associations of peasants,
nor will it be transferred to the peasants as a class, but to all of
society.

This is the pitiless condemnation of all immediatist distortions, which
have hounded us incessantly for so many years, even among alleged left
wing revolutionaries.

This Marxist theorem strikes a fatal blow at all communalism and
syndicalism, as well as all "enterprise-based socialism" (see the
relevant chapters of our "Fundamentals of Revolutionary Communism"),
because these old fashioned programs, superannuated and rotten,
"surrender" indivisible energies of society to limited groups.

This fundamental postulate annuls any definition, whether advocated by
Stalinists or post-Stalinists, of socialist property in accordance with
the agrarian forms in which the Kolkhozes have been seen to deliver all
of society, the material life of all of society, into the hands of a
particular class of producers.

Furthermore, not even the handing over to the state of all the
industrial enterprises, as is the case in Russia today, merits the name
of socialism. This state, due the very fact that it is in the process of
being transferred to "particular groups of producers", by farmstead or
by province, is not a historical representative of the integral,
classless society of tomorrow. A character of that kind can be realized
and maintained only on the plane of political theory, thanks to the
party form, which brutally thrashes all immediatism and which is the
only form that can exorcise the opportunist plague.

But we shall return briefly to this passage from Marx, which shows us
how all attribution of ownership, indeed all material transfer of the
land, to limited groups, cuts off the royal road to communism.

"The nationalization of land will work a complete change in the
relations between labor and capital and finally do away altogether with
capitalist production, whether industrial or rural. Only then the class
distinctions and privileges will disappear together with the economical
basis from which they originate and society will be transformed into an
association of 'producers' (note that these quotation marks have been
inserted by Marx, and that is they way it should be read--[Bordiga's
note]). To live upon other people's labor will become a thing of the
past. There will no longer exist a government nor a state distinct from
society itself."

Before submitting these essential, immutable and never changing
principles of Marxism to one more examination, we shall state for the
record that Marx never hesitated to resolutely depict the communist
society, assuming an unlimited responsibility for the entire
revolutionary movement of a historical stage.

This is the solid metal of original Marxism that sparkles so brightly
from underneath the rime of a thousand subsequent incrustations, and
which will tomorrow shine directly in the light.

## Marx and Landed Property

In the text by Karl Marx referred to above, the program of the
communists is defined under two aspects. Historically and economically,
it defends big agricultural estates, for which the term "cultivation on
a large scale" is used, as opposed to the small farm and plot of land.
In addition, the communist program calls for the disappearance or, as it
is often less correctly expressed, the abolition of every form of landed
property, which also implies every subject of property, whether
individual or collective.

Marx did not spend a lot of time addressing the traditional
philosophical and juridical justifications for man's property relations
as they affect the land. These justifications go back to the old inanity
that property is an extension of the person. The ancient syllogism
begins to be false in its very premise, which is passed over in silence:
my person, my physical body, belongs to me; it is my property. We deny
even this, which is at bottom nothing but a preconceived notion born
from the hoary forms of slavery, in which land and human bodies together
were seized by force. If I am a slave, my body has an alien owner, the
master. If I am not a slave, I am the master of myself. It seems crystal
clear and is also pure foolishness. In that development of the social
structure in which the odious form of possession of another human being
underwent a process of decline, instead of heralding the decline and
fall of all subsequent forms of property, it was logical that the
ideological superstructure--in the illustrious tradition of all real
processes!--should only take this tiny little pygmy step: for it merely
registered a simple change of the master of the slave, something that
poor humanity was all-too-accustomed to. Before, I went from being a
slave of Titus to being a slave of Sempronius; now I have become a slave
of myself.... Perhaps that was not such a good deal!

This vulgar, anti-socialist mode of reasoning is more foolish than the
myth that there was an original solitary man who declared himself king
of the universe. According to the Biblical construction, it must even be
admitted that, due to the multiplication of humans, the system of
relations between the ego and the others only became more dense, and the
illusory autonomy of the ego became ever more dispersed. For us,
Marxists, every step from simple to new and more complicated modes of
production augments the network of multiple relations between the
individual and all his kind, and reduces the conditions currently
designated by the terms autonomy and freedom. This is how all
individualism dissolves.

The modern, atheist bourgeois who defends property sees the course of
history according to his class ideology (whose debris are today the
patrimony of only petty bourgeois and so many alleged Marxists). He sees
the process upside-down, as a succession of stages of a ridiculous
disconnection of the individual-man from social bonds (while, in
reality, the bonds between man and external nature are becoming more and
more dense over the course of history). The liberation of man from
slavery, liberation from servitude and from despotism, liberation from
exploitation!

In this construction that stands opposed to ours, the individual loosens
his bonds, breaks free and constructs the autonomy and greatness of the
Person! And many people interpret this series as the stages that lead to
the revolution.

Individual, person and property all go well together. Given the false
principle that we just examined (my body is mine, and so is my hand),
the tool with which our powers are extended for the purposes of labor is
also mine. The land, too, is a tool of human labor (here, the second
premise logically follows). The products of my hand and of its various
extensions are also mine: Property is therefore an inalienable attribute
of the Person.

Just how contradictory such an argument really is, can be seen in the
fact that, in the ideology of the defenders of the private ownership of
agricultural land who preceded the enlightenment and the capitalists,
the Earth is itself productive of wealth, before and even without the
labor that man applies to it. How, then, is the right of possession of
man over parcels of land converted into a mysterious "natural law"?

## How Marx Responds

Asked for his view on the nationalization of the land, right from the
start Marx liquidated all such impotent philosophical formulas.

"The property in the soil -- that original source of all wealth -- has
become the great problem upon the solution of which depends the future
of the working class.

"While not intending to discuss here all the argument put forward by the
advocates of private property in land -- jurists, philosophers, and
political economists -- we shall only state firstly that they disguise
the original fact of conquest under the cloak of 'natural right'. If
conquest constitutes a natural right on the part of the few, the many
have only to gather sufficient strength in order to acquire the natural
right of reconquering what has been taken from them. In the progress of
history (Marx means that the first acts of violence created ownership of
the land which, at the beginning, had been free, and which was later
held in common--[Bordiga's note]), the conquerors attempt to give a sort
of social sanction to their original title derived from brute force,
through the instrumentality of laws imposed by themselves. At last comes
the philosopher who declares those laws to imply the universal consent
of society. If indeed private property in land is based upon such a
universal consent, it evidently becomes extinct from the moment the
majority of a society dissent from warranting it. However, leaving aside
the so-called 'rights' of property...."

Here, our proposal is to follow Marx's thinking to the negation of "any
kind" of property, that is, of any subject of property (private
individual, associated individuals, state, nation, and, finally,
society) as well as of any object of property (the land, concerning
which we are speaking here, the instruments of labor in general, and the
products of labor).

As we have always maintained, all of this is contained in the initial
formula of the negation of private property, that is, in the
consideration of such a form as a transitory characteristic in the
history of human society which is destined to disappear in the present
stage.

Furthermore, property that is not conceived as private will also
logically come to an end. With regard to the land, what is most obvious
concerning the characteristic of the institution is the enclosure within
which no one may trespass without the consent of the owner. Private
ownership means that the owner is not deprived of the right to enter.
Regardless of the identity of the subject of this right, a single person
or a multiple-person entity, this "private" character survives.

## Against All Divided Property

Marx then goes on to take a position against the practice of
agricultural production on small, individual farms.

Leaving aside the philosophical question, and after making a few
sarcastic remarks, he continues as follows:

"... we affirm that the economical development of society, the increase
and concentration of people, the necessity to agriculture of collective
and organized labor as well as of machinery and similar contrivances,
render the nationalization of land a 'social necessity', against which
no amount of talk about the rights of property will avail.

"Changes dictated by social necessity are sure to work their way sooner
or later, because the imperative wants of society must be satisfied, and
legislation will always be forced to adapt itself to them.

"What we require is a daily increasing production whose exigencies
cannot be met by allowing a few individuals to regulate it according to
their whims and private interests or to ignorantly exhaust the powers of
the soil. All modern methods such as irrigation, drainage, steam
plowing, chemical treatment, etc., ought to be applied to agriculture at
last. But the scientific knowledge we possess, and the technical means
of agriculture we command, such as machinery, etc., can never be
successfully applied but by cultivating the land on a large scale.
Cultivation on a large scale -- even under its present capitalist form
that degrades the producer himself to a mere beast of burden -- has to
show results so much superior to the small and piecemeal cultivation --
would it then not, if applied on national dimension, be sure to give an
immense impulse to production? The ever growing wants of the people on
the one side, the ever increasing price of agricultural products on the
other, afford the irrefutable proof that the nationalization of land has
become a 'social necessity'. The diminution of agricultural produce
springing from individual abuse ceases to be possible as soon as
cultivation is carried on under the control, at the cost, and for the
benefit of the nation."

It is obvious that this text was intended to serve as propaganda and was
aimed at a milieu that was not yet converted to Marxism. Very soon,
however, he will arrive at the radical theses that we have denominated
under the subheading of "Marx's Great Pronouncement". Here we can see
displayed his preference for a national management of a state character,
when he speaks of costs and benefits. Further along he will clarify that
the bourgeois state will always be incapable of providing the necessary
impulse to agriculture.

The author still deals with contemporary issues of his time, and it is
interesting to see how he poses them exactly the same way Engels did in
1894 (as discussed in the first part of this study). How can anyone
today usurp the name of Marxist who has come to maintain that, first the
sharecropper, and then the tenant farmer and finally the day laborer of
the countryside, must become landowners, as the present-day "communists"
of Italy and Europe do?[^fn-4] For us, this essential part of Marxism,
just as it was between 1868 (actually, even before that) and 1894,
remains completely valid today.

## The Agrarian Question in France

Marx goes on to refute the cliché of the "rich" small-scale cultivator
in France. His words require no commentary. The reader will discern
their relation not only to the propositions of Engels, but also to those
of Lenin, whose strict orthodoxy as an agrarian Marxist we have already
demonstrated in depth in our study of Russia.

"France has often been alluded to, but with its peasantry proprietorship
it is farther off the nationalization of land than England with its
landlordism. In France, it is true, the soil is accessible to all who
can buy it, but this very faculty has brought about the division of land
into small plots cultivated by men with small means and mainly thrown on
the resources of the bodily labor of both themselves and their families.
This form of landed property and the piecemeal cultivation necessitated
by it not only excludes all appliance of modern agricultural
improvements, but simultaneously converts the tiller himself into the
most decided enemy of all social progress, and above all, of the
nationalization of the land. Enchained to the soil upon which he has to
spend all his vital energies in order to get a relatively small return,
bound to give away the greater part of his produce to the state in the
form of taxes, to the law tribe in the form of judiciary costs, and to
the usurer in the form of interest; utterly ignorant of the social
movement outside his petty field of action; he still clings with frantic
fondness to his spot of soil and his merely nominal proprietorship in
the same. In this way, the French peasant has been thrown into a most
fatal antagonism to the industrial working class. Peasantry
proprietorship being thus the greatest obstacle to the 'nationalization
of land'. France, in its present state, is certainly not the place where
we must look for a solution of this great problem. To nationalize the
land and let it out in small plots to individuals or workingmen's
societies would, under a middle-class government, only bring about a
reckless competition among them, and cause a certain increase of 'rent',
and thus lend new facilities to the appropriators for feeding upon the
producers."

The hypothesis advanced in the above paragraph foresaw the possibility
that state measures in favor of nationalization would produce a class of
tenant farmers who would take advantage of the wage laborers, and
exploit them.

## Classes and Producers

It is at this point in the manuscript where Marx inserted the
fundamental passage on the debate at the international congress of 1868.
Regarding this passage, we placed enormous emphasis on the thesis that
the land is handed over to the 'nation' rather than to the associated
agricultural workers. The latter formula is anti-socialist because it
would "surrender all society to one exclusive class of producers", an
observation that we must always keep in mind. Socialism excludes not
just the subjection of producer to owner, but also that of producer to
producer.

The Russian agrarian formula, with its Kolkhozes, is spurious communism.
The Kolkhozniki form a class of producers who have in their hands the
subsistence of the entire "nation". Their rights with respect to the
"state" are expanding every year: their taxes have been reduced, the
prices paid for their farm products have been raised, they have been
granted a certain degree of "economic" independence, etc. We shall
clearly distinguish between the terms, state, nation and society; for
now we have the right to say that, economically, competition and rent
have reappeared in the Russian structure.

In the Sovkhozes, the agricultural workers are reduced to pure wage
workers, like the industrial workers, without any rights over the
disposal of the products of the countryside (to this date), and do not
form a class of producers erected against society, just as the
industrial workers do not form such a class, the industrial workers who
are acclaimed as the owners (although this term makes them blush for
shame in Russia!) of society itself, that is, as possessing hegemony
over the peasants (!).

The classic Russian discussion concerning the question of the land was
posed in three ways: Repartition (populists); Municipalization
(Mensheviks); and Nationalization (Bolsheviks). Lenin always defended
nationalization in revolutionary doctrine and practice, just as Marx
defended it in the passage quoted above. The repartition of the
populists, an abject peasant ideal, is at about the same level as the
policies of the modern communist parties, in Italy for example, where
they adorn themselves with the adjective popular and are just as
deserving of the adjective populist. Municipalization corresponds with
the program of giving the monopoly over the land not to society, but
only to the peasant class. The Russian municipality, as this theory
views it, is understood to be the rural village whose entire population
is composed of peasants and which has tenuous links to the communitarian
tradition of the primitive _Mir_ (see our series on the economic
structure of Russia).[^fn-5] The system of Kolkhozes is neither
Marxist nor Leninist, and could very well be defined--especially in view
of the "reforms" that are currently being implemented--as a
provincialization of the land, over which the cities are increasingly
losing all influence. This deformation, accentuated by the historical
events of 1958, is in total contradiction to the doctrinal position of
the party of 1868, according to which the land must not be given to "one
exclusive class of producers" (the associates of the Kolkhozes), but to
the entire collectivity of rural and urban workers.

The thesis of nationalization must not be understood in the manner of
Ricardo: the land to the state, along with all the rent of the land.
This means: the land to the industrial capitalist class or to its
representative, the industrial capitalist state (like the Russian
state). Marxist nationalization of the land is the dialectical contrary
of its division into parcels and allotment to peasant cooperatives and
associations. This dialectical opposition is just as applicable to the
structure of communist society, without classes or state (see the
fragment quoted above), as it is to the political struggle, with respect
to both the party and the class, within capitalist society, where the
demand for the division and re-allotment of the land is much more
indecent than it was when it was advocated under the Czarist regime.
When the theses of the doctrine of the party are established as
invariant and inviolable by both the party center and the militant rank
and file, they constitute the defense against the future threat of the
opportunist plague, and the thesis of nationalization is an appropriate
and typical example.

## Nation and Society

The term "nation", however, presents an advantage with respect to the
term "society", whether it is employed in the context of theory or
agitation. As an extension in space, it is well known that we consider
socialist society international, and that internationalism is a concept
that is firmly rooted in the class struggle. Marx advises us, however,
whenever he engages in the critique of the capitalist economic
structure, that he will be speaking of the nation in his study of the
dynamic of the economic forces, even though society spans the different
nations, but never with the intention of imprisoning the revolutionary
transition to socialism within strict national limits. Furthermore,
although it might be useful to speak of the nation rather than the
state, we must not forget that, as long as the class state which
expresses the rule of the capitalist class exists, the nation will not
constitute the unity of all the inhabitants of a territory in a
homogeneous complex, and this will not even be realized after the
establishment of the dictatorship of the proletariat in one or more
countries.

The term "nation", restrictive with respect to class, internationalist
and revolutionary demands, is still useful as an expression of the
contrasting position against the surrender of particular spheres of
productive means (the land, in this case) to isolated parts and classes
of national society, to local or enterprise-based groups, or to
professional categories.

The other advantage that we mentioned, is reflected with respect to the
limitation in time. A nation is born, and it includes the succession of
living generations, future and even past. For us, the real subject of
social activity becomes more extensive, in time, than the same society
of living men at any given date. The idea of progeny (keeping in mind,
of course, that we are referring to the progeny of the whole human race,
the species, a word that was employed by Marx and Engels, and which is
more powerful than the nation and society) goes beyond all the bourgeois
ideologies of power and juridical sovereignty that are professed by
democrats.

The concept of class alone is enough to refute the idea that the state
represents all the living citizens, and we laugh at those who propose to
draw such a bold conclusion from the grant of universal suffrage to all
adults. We know quite well that the bourgeois state represents the
interests and power of one single class, even when it holds general
elections.

There is more, however. Even if a representative or structural network
is enclosed in the limits of a single class, that of the wage labor
force (it would be worse if it assumed the generic designation of the
Russian people), we are not satisfied with a construction of sovereignty
based on the mechanism of consultation of all the individual elements of
the rank and file (assuming that this mechanism could exist). And the
same is true both under bourgeois power, in order to direct the
revolutionary struggle, and after it has been overthrown.

We have often proclaimed, especially in the "Fundamentals of
Revolutionary Communism", that only the party--obviously a minority
within society and the proletarian class--is the form that can express
the historical influences of successive generations in the passage from
one form of social production to another, in its unity in space and
time, in its doctrinal, organizational and strategic unity.

Consequently, the proletarian revolutionary force is not expressed by a
consultative democracy within the class, neither during the stage of the
struggle nor after its victory, but by the uninterrupted course of the
historical line of the party.

Obviously, not only do we admit that a minority of the living and
present generation can direct, against the majority (even of the class),
the historical advance, but, even more importantly, we think that only
this minority can constitute the directive layer that can provide the
guidance that will link it to the struggle and the efforts of the
militants of past and future generations, acting in the capacity as
guides of the program of the new society, as has been exactly and
clearly pre-established by the historical doctrine.

This construction that, in spite of all the philistines, leads us to
proclaim the frank demand, dictatorship of the communist party, is
undeniably contained in the system of Marx.

## Not Even Society Will Own the Land

In the third volume of _Capital_, edited by Engels after the death of
Marx, Chapter 46 bears the title: "Building Site Rent. Rent in Mining.
Price of Land". Its conclusions are especially striking in the powerful
doctrine of land rent, reiterated line by line by the great combatant
Lenin throughout his life. Since it is maintained and proven in our
economic science that the rent extracted by the landlord has the
character of an aliquot part of the surplus value that the class of wage
laborers produces and which is converted into capitalist profit, it is
clear that our adversaries may pose this objection: there are business
transactions in which the owner receives the rent, as in the case of
residential and commercial property transactions, while the land lies
sleeping under the sun and not even one worker puts a shovel to it. From
what labor, and from what resulting surplus value, does this owner's
profit derive?

Our economic science, however, is not invalidated by this objection. We
are not an academic department, but an army formed in battle order, and
we defend the cause of those who have worked and died as well as those
who have not yet worked and have not yet been born.

If you seek to reason following the bureaucratic formulas of the debts
and assets of corporations, or if you deduce legal power within the
limits of the names and results of elections, please leave now.

Marx responds by bringing future generations onto the scene of the
battle (this is an old aspect of our doctrine and not a clever invention
on our part to make our thesis seem more correct, since, in opposition
to the theory and practice of the revolution, the majority of the
currently existing proletarian class could also be mistaken and could
find itself in the ranks of the enemy):

"That it is only the title of a number of persons to the possession of
the globe enabling them to appropriate to themselves as tribute a
portion of the surplus-labour of society and furthermore to a constantly
increasing extent with the development of production, is concealed by
the fact that the capitalised rent, i.e., precisely this capitalised
tribute, appears as the price of land, which may therefore be sold like
any other article of commerce."

Is this clear? If I think that a piece of land, which in the future will
presumably yield five thousand liras per year to its owner, can be sold
for one hundred thousand liras, I have converted into an active force
the surplus labor of the workers who will labor not twenty years from
now, but in an infinite number of years from now.

"In the same way, the slave-holder considers a Negro, whom he has
purchased, as his property, not because the institution of slavery
(which was a gift to him from past generations--[Bordiga's note]) as
such entitles him to that Negro, but because he has acquired him like
any other commodity, through sale and purchase."

He will pay money for the future years of the negro and his descendants!

"But the title itself is simply transferred, and not created by the
sale. The title must exist before it can be sold, and a series of sales
can no more create this title through continued repetition than a single
sale can." (This allusion of the Doctor of Jurisprudence, Marx, refers
to the fiction of the bourgeois legal codes which hold that the "proof
of ownership" is obtained by presenting the documentation of title
conveyances reflecting the chain of ownership for a certain number of
years, twenty or thirty, for example--[Bordiga's note].) What created it
in the first place were the production relations. As soon as these have
reached a point where they must shed their skin, the material source of
the title, justified economically and historically and arising from the
process which creates social life, falls by the wayside, along with all
transactions based upon it."

For example, we shall add, in order to clarify the concept for the
reader, when the slave system of production collapsed because it was no
longer profitable and due to the revolt of the slaves, all the latter
became free men, and all previous contracts of sales of slaves were
nullified! Here, however, we shall invite the reader, once again, to
read this powerful passage of the brilliant and original interpretation
of history of human societies, which is no less applicable to the
society of tomorrow:

"From the standpoint of a higher economic form of society, private
ownership of the globe by single individuals will appear quite as absurd
as private ownership of one man by another. Even a whole society, a
nation, or even all simultaneously existing societies taken together,
are not the owners of the globe. They are only its possessors, its
usufructuaries, and, like _boni patres familias_, they must hand it down
to succeeding generations in an improved condition."

## Utopia and Marxism

Marx's method is also clearly displayed in this decisive passage. Our
forecast of the death of property and capital, of its disappearance
(which is a much higher goal than its inept transference from the
individual subject to the social subject) and also our refusal to
attribute it to the decision and the will of the individual-subject
(even if it is the subject of the oppressed class), but only to the
party-collectivity, a collectivity whose energy does not derive from
quantity, but from quality, are constructed on the basis of a total
scientific analysis of today's society and its past. The capitalism that
we want to hang from the gibbet and kill, must first be studied and
understood with regard to its structure and its real development. It is
a duty, not in the moral and personal sense, but an impersonal function
of the party, an entity that is superior to the changing opinions of men
and the confines of successive generations.

It is this point that provides the response to a possible objection to
our acceptance of Marxism, the only one that captures its power and
scope. The Marx that has been presented for decades by the revolutionary
current when the latter champions the maximum program of the communist
social structure, is precisely the Marx who went beyond, fought against
and left behind all utopianism.

The opposition between utopianism and scientific socialism does not
reside in the fact that the Marxist socialist declares that, with regard
to the nature of the future society, he is looking out the window
waiting for its forms to pass by before he describes them! The error of
the utopian lies in the fact that, after verifying the defects of
contemporary society (which, in some of the utopian masters, Marx
respectfully praises), he does not deduce the framework of the future
society from a concatenation of real processes that form a chain that
links their previous course to the future, but from his own head, from
human reason and not from the social and natural reality. The utopian
believes that the destination point of the course of social evolution
must be contained in the spirit of man. Whether it is God the creator
that they have induced in the spirit of man, or the introspective
philosophical critique that they have discovered in the spirit of man,
it is ideological systems composed of Justice, Equality, Liberty, etc.,
that comprise the colors of the palette in which the socialist idealist
dips his paintbrush to depict the world of tomorrow as it should be.

This naïve, but not always ignoble, origin, causes utopianism to expect
its utopia to come about from a labor of persuasion and emulation among
men, according to the word that is so fashionable today to express in a
truly inappropriate way the conflagration of history. The utopians,
impelled by their good intentions, once thought they could be victorious
by winning over the existing power centers to their rose-colored
projects. Their preconceived ideas prevented them from participating in
the process of the struggle and the social conflict, of the overthrow of
power and the use not of persuasion, but of unmitigated force, in the
work from which the new society will emerge.

Our conception of the human problem is completely the opposite. Things
are not the way they are because someone made a mistake, or was
deceived, but because a causal and determinate series of forces has
entered into play in the development of the human species: it is first
of all a matter of understanding how, and why, and by what general laws;
and then, to deduce its future directions.

Marxism, then, does not shrink from declaring in its battle programs
what will be the character of the society of tomorrow and, specifically,
how the rigorously individualized characters that comprise today's
capitalist and mercantile social form measure up against each other.
Marxism makes it possible to explicitly describe them with much greater
validity and certitude than those who sketched out the pallid depictions
of utopia, even if they were sometimes quite bold for their time.

To renounce the effort to engage in such anticipation of the features of
the communist social structure is not Marxism, nor is it worthy of the
powerful corpus of classical writings of our school. It is truly a
regressive and conservative revisionism that parades as objectivity what
is nothing but mean-spirited cynicism, that is: waiting for the
revelation, on a virgin background, of a mysterious design that would be
a secret of history. In its philistine pride, this method is nothing but
the alibi prepared in advance by the professional cliques that have
never experienced life on the heights of the party form and have reduced
it to a stage for the contortions of a handful of activists. If these
features are to remain secrets, one might just as well wait for the
fortunate turn of events in the sacristies for the revelation of the
divine will, or in the antechambers in service of the powerful where you
can lick their plates in the kitchen.

## Property and Usufruct

One proof of the total opposition between Marxism and utopianism, which
we have sought to highlight on the terrain of doctrine, is the passage
where Marx traces the outlines of the future structure, a passage that
is just as obligatory as the one that describes society as not being the
owner of the land.

The administration of the cultivation of the land, in reality, must not
be conducted in such a way as to only satisfy the appetites of the
present generation. Marx's accusation, constantly invoked against
capitalism, that the prevailing form of production exhausts the
resources of the soil and renders the problem of feeding the people
insoluble, is correct. Now that people are becoming increasingly more
numerous, "scientists" are studying--with the seriousness with which we
are so familiar--new ways to end hunger among the inhabitants of the
planet.

The management of the land, the cornerstone of the whole social problem,
must be oriented in such a way that it will correspond to the best
future development of the population of the globe. Human society today,
even if we were to understand this term to transcend the limitations of
states and nations, and when it has established a "superior form of
organization", and even to transcend classes (then we shall not only
have advanced beyond the somewhat vulgar opposition between "leisure
classes" and "productive classes", but also beyond the opposition
between urban and rural productive classes, and manual and intellectual
classes, as Marx teaches), this society, which will consist in the
aggregate of several billion men, will always be a set restricted to the
"human species", even though it is becoming increasingly more numerous
due to the extension of the average lifespan of its members.

The management of the land will be voluntarily and scientifically
subordinated, for the first time in history, to the species, that is, it
will be organized in the forms that most effectively respond to the
goals of the humanity of the future.

This is not fantasy--heaven preserve us from science-fiction!--or
utopia, but is instead based on the realistic and practical criteria
that Marx used: the difference between ownership and usufruct.

In modern legal theory, property is "perpetual", while usufruct is
temporary, limited to a pre-established number of years or the natural
life of the usufructuary. In bourgeois theory, property is defined as
"_ius utendi et abutendi_", that is, ownership confers the right to use
and abuse. Theoretically, the owner could destroy the thing he owns; for
example, irrigate his fields with salt water, sterilizing it, as the
Romans did to Carthage after having burned it to the ground. Today's
jurists engage in subtle discussions about a social limit to property,
but this is not science, only class fear. The usufructuary, on the other
hand, has a more restricted right than the owner: the right to use, yes;
the right to abuse, no. Once the term of the contract of usufruct has
expired, or when the usufructuary dies, in the case of a life estate
contract, the land reverts to the owner. Positive law requires that it
be returned in the same condition that it was in when it was delivered
into the power of the usufructuary. Even the modest sharecropper who
rents his little piece of land cannot neglect its cultivation, but must
administer it like a good _paterfamilias_, just as the good landowner
does, for example, for whom the perpetuity of its use or enjoyment
consists in its hereditary transmission to his children or heirs. In the
Italian Civil Code, the sacramental formula of the good _paterfamilias_
may be found in Article 1001 and also in Article 1587.

Therefore, society will have only the use and not the ownership of the
land.

Utopianism is metaphysical, Marxist socialism is dialectical. In the
respective stages of his gigantic theoretical construction, Marx can
successively support:

a) large-scale property (even capitalist large scale property, although
the wage workers employed in such property are mere beasts of burden)
against small-scale property, even when the latter does not hire wage
labor (no reference is made, for the sake of decency, to the small farm,
like that of the French tenant farmer of 1894 or the Italian tenant
farmer of 1958 who, by employing human beasts of burden, adds to the
reactionary trend of micro-parcelization);

b) state property, even if it is capitalist, against large-scale private
property (nationalization);

c) state property after the victory of the proletarian dictatorship;

d) for the higher organization of integral communism, only the rational
use of the land by society, and putting the disgraced term of property
in Engels' museum of old rubbish.

## Use Value and Exchange Value

The fundamental thesis of revolutionary Marxism easily extends the
negation of individual ownership and then social ownership of the land
to the other instruments of production that are the result of human
labor, and to the products of labor, whether they are production or
consumption goods.

There are capital goods on agrarian properties that are essential for
their exploitation. One fundamental case, which is the source of the
word, capital (as Marx frequently reminds us), is that of the draught
animals and cattle. In Italian we call this, _scrota viva_; in French,
_cheptel_, which is the same word as capital. The term for pigs raised
commercially comes from _caput_, which means "head" in Latin. But the
bourgeois do not delude themselves when it comes to the human head, and
lead us to prepare another natural law: Capital, as the extension of the
Person.

This is the head of the bull. The extension of the head of the
bourgeoisie is not the eternal principles of human law, but only the
horns.

It is clear that the person who administers the land cannot eat all his
cattle--we have seen historical examples of this--without destroying
that special instrument of production, capable of reproducing itself if
it is wisely cared for.

Society will be the usufructuary, rather than the owner, of the animal
species. In the book by Engels there is an amusing passage about the
ludicrous proposal that the peasants should be allowed unrestricted
rights to hunting and fishing in France, with regard to the danger posed
by the destruction, which subsequently did take place, of certain
species of game animals.

It might take some time, but it will not be difficult, to extend our
deduction to all private capital in agriculture and industry. But we
shall attempt to proceed by sketching the broad outlines of our
position.

In his magisterial chapters on the land, Marx demonstrates that its
price and value, derived from capitalized rent, does not enter into the
capital of exploitation of the agrarian enterprise because, if there is
no unfortunate devastation of the fertility of the soil, it will be
intact at the end of the annual cycle. He also draws the obvious
comparison with the "fixed part of industrial constant capital", the
part that only enters into the calculation of the circulating capital by
the part that is expended in one cycle and is reintegrated
(amortization). The land renews itself; and this is also true of the
cattle (with a certain amount of labor on the part of the rancher). In
agriculture, the tools are replaced to a large extent each year from the
total value of the products. In industry, on the other hand, these tools
are only replaced annually to a very small extent.

Setting aside the quantitative examination, we want to draw attention to
the fact that humanity also has fixed capital that is amortized over
very long cycles, as is the case with the Roman Aqueducts which, after
two thousand years, are still in use. Criminal capitalism seeks to
amortize its investments in very short terms and attempts to rapidly
replace--at the expense of the proletariat--all the fixed capital. Why?
Because it is the exclusive owner of the fixed capital, while over the
circulating capital it only enjoys rights of usufruct. We refer the
reader to the distinction between dead labor and living labor that is
elaborated in the reports of Pentecostés and Piombino.[^fn-6]

Capitalism insists on the frenzied activation of the labor of the
living, and makes the labor of the dead its inhuman property. In the
communist economy we shall limit ourselves to what the bourgeois
theoreticians call amortization, that is, replacement of fixed capital
goods, in an opposite way, by revivifying them.

The antithesis between property and usufruct corresponds to that between
fixed capital-circulating capital; and to that between dead labor-living
labor.

We are in favor of the eternal life of the species; our enemies are on
the sinister side of eternal death. And life will sweep them aside,
synthesizing the opposed terms in the reality of communism.

We must add one more formula under this same antithesis: monetary
exchange and physical use. Mercantile exchange value versus use value.

The communist revolution is the death of the world of buying and
selling.

## Objectified Labor and Living Labor

Our comrade readers, who, according to our method of work, collaborate
in the common activity of the party, should refer at this point to the
entire second part of the summary of the meeting at Piombino, where the
_Grundrisse_ of Marx is thoroughly summarized.

In this vast construction, economic individualism is annulled, and
Social Man makes his appearance, whose confines are identical with those
of Human Society in its entirety, or rather, those of the Human Species.

In the capitalist form, industrial fixed capital is counterposed to
human labor, which is converted into a measure of the exchange value of
the products or commodities. Fixed capital is the monstrous
enemy--whether or not the capitalist as an individual person lies behind
it, and with reference to this question our quotations from Marx have
been innumerable--that weighs on the mass of the producers and
monopolizes a product that not only concerns all, but is also of concern
to the entire active course of the species for millennia, to Science and
Technology elaborated and deposited in the Social Mind. Now that the
capitalist Form is descending down the developmental scale into
degeneracy, this Monster is killing Science itself; it mismanages it, it
criminally administers its usufructuary rights by destroying the
patrimony of future generations.

In these pages we see the current phenomenon of Automation predicted and
theorized for the distant future. What we shall permit ourselves to call
the Romance of objectivized labor has its metamorphosis for an epilogue,
by means of which the Monster is transformed into a beneficent force for
all of humanity, which will not allow the extortion of useless surplus
labor, but will reduce necessary labor to a minimum, "for the total
benefit of the artistic, scientific, etc., training of individuals", who
will from that point on be elevated to the status of Social Individuals.

Here we would like to draw from the classic and authentic materials,
which are more valid and obvious today than they were when they were
first conceived, another no less authentic formulation. Once the
proletarian revolution has put an end to the destruction of Science,
which is the work of the Social Mind; once labor time has been
compressed to a minimum that will be transformed into a pleasure; once
Fixed Capital--today's Monster--has been elevated to human forms, that
is, once Capital--a transitory historical product--has been abolished,
rather than conquered for man or for Society, then industry will be like
the land, once the productive machinery, equipment and buildings as well
as the land have been liberated of all ownership, regardless of the
owner.

It would not be much of a conquest if the productive apparatus were to
remain a monopoly of a clique of non-workers, which is a rather hollow
phrase insofar as the bourgeois were, at first, a bold class that
constituted the bearers of the Social Mind and the most advanced Social
Praxis. For its part, society organized in a higher form--international
communism--will not possess the productive apparatus in the form of
property and Capital, but in usufruct, saving the future of the Species
with each step it takes against the physical needs caused by Nature,
which will be the only adversary then.

Once property and Capital have died out in both agriculture and
industry, another commonplace, i.e., "individual ownership of consumer
products", which was a concession to the arduous task of traditional
propaganda, must be tossed on the ash-heap of the past. In reality, any
revolutionary transformation will fail if every object does not shed its
commodity character, and if labor does not cease to be the measure of
"exchange value", another form that, together with monetary measures,
must die along with the capitalist mode of production.

Here we shall provide some textual citations:

"As soon as labour in the direct form has ceased to be the great
well-spring of wealth, labour time ceases and must cease to be its
measure, and hence exchange value [must cease to be the measure] of use
value."

Taking pity on the mediocrity of Stalin and the Russians who persist in
claiming that the law of value prevails in socialism (!), we were led to
conclude: May the lightning of the Final Judgment fall upon your
heads![^fn-7]

The drunk who waves his bottle, saying, it's mine, I bought it with the
money from my wages (paid by private or State institutions), while he is
a victim of the Capital form, is also a usufructuary traitor to the
health of the species. And so is the idiot who smokes cigarettes! Such
"property" will be eliminated from the higher organization of society.

The debasement of the wage slave reaches new lows in the crisis of
unemployment. Engels wrote to Marx, on December 7, 1857:

"Among the Philistines here, the crisis drives them terribly to drink.
No one can endure his life at home, with the family and all its worries.
The circles become agitated and the consumption of spirituous liquors
undergoes a steep increase. The deeper they sink into boredom, the more
they want entertainment. But on the next day they present the most
discouraging spectacle of physical and moral complaints." 1857 or 1958?!

Therefore, man will not consume himself as a beast-person, in the name
of the infamous ownership of the object of exchange; use, or
consumption, will be conducted in accordance with the higher requirement
of social man, the perpetuation of the species, and no longer under the
influence of drugs, as is the rule today.

## The Death of Individualism

It is not possible for the proletarian class party to orient itself in
the correct revolutionary direction if its agitational material does not
totally correspond with the stable, invariant foundations of the theory.

The questions of everyday action and the future program are only the two
dialectical sides of the same problem, as has been demonstrated on so
many occasions by Marx right up until his death, and by Engels and Lenin
("April Theses", Central Committee of October!).

These men did not improvise or rely on revelations; they grasped the
compass of our action, which is too easy to lose.

This clearly indicates the danger, and our questions are well posed when
they go against the general mistaken directions. Its formulas and terms
can be falsified by traitors and mental defectives; but its use always
provides a sure compass when it is continuous and consistent.

If we employ the language of philosophy and history, our enemy is
individualism, or personalism. If we employ the language of politics,
our enemy is democratic electoralism, regardless of the camp. If we
employ the language of economics, our enemy is mercantilism.

Any tactic that seeks to utilize these insidious methods in an attempt
to achieve an apparent advantage, is equivalent to the sacrifice of the
future of the party to the success of one day, or one year; it is
equivalent to unconditional surrender to the Monster of the
counterrevolution.

[^fn-1]: Turin Meeting, June 1-2, 1958. In publishing these 
"corollaries" of the meeting of the party held on June 1 and 2, 1958 in
Turin, which first appeared in issues numbers 16 and 17 of the same 
year in our bimonthly _Il Programma Comunista_, we must recall that the
Turin Meeting was convened in response--during its second session--to
the meeting of the most extreme representatives of post-Stalinist
revisionism held in Ljubljana, and was at the same time a living
vindication of the central role of the party in the revolution and in
the state of the proletarian dictatorship, and the occasion for an
ardent polemic against the distorters and "modernizers" of the Marxist
revolutionary vision. As a result, the prefigurative outline that is
elaborated in the text reproduced here of the fundamental features of
communist society is not ... a blind leap forward by the intellect or
by desire into the empty world of ideas: it is inseparable from the
struggle to destroy the capitalist mode of production and thus from the
reconstruction of the guiding-organ of this formidable battle, the
class party. This is a text that was written for revolutionary
militants, not for those who dream of a City of the Sun or for impotent
philosophers who are waiting for the Word to be made Flesh.
[^fn-2]: See the series of documents produced at General Meetings of
the party on this question in "El marxismo y la cuestion nacional y
colonial", _El Programa Comunista_, no. 36, October-December 1980.
[^fn-3]: We may add, in 1980: "and in Spain and all of Latin America."
[^fn-4]: See "Trayectoria y catástrofe de la forma capitalista en la
clásica y monolítica construcción teorica del marxismo", which is the
report of the General Meeting of the Party in Piombino (September
1957), in Amadeo Bordiga, _Economia marxista e economia
controrivoluzionaria_, Ed. Iskra, Milan, 1976. See also Marx's "Wage
Labour and Capital".
[^fn-5]: See "Russia e rivoluzione nella teoria marxista", _Il
Programma Comunista_, nos. 21-24 (1954) and no. 1 (1955); and
"Struttura economica e sociale della Russia d'oggi", first published in
our Italian journal in 1955-1957 and republished by Edizione Il
Programma Comunista, Milan, 1976.
[^fn-6]: See "Trayectoria y catástrofe de la forma capitalista en la
clásica y monolítica construcción teorica del marxismo", which is the
report of the General Meeting of the Party in Piombino (September
1957), in Amadeo Bordiga, _Economia marxista e economia
controrivoluzionaria_, Ed. Iskra, Milan, 1976. See also Marx's "Wage
Labour and Capital".
[^fn-7]: _Ibid_

