---
title: Weekend at Bernie's
author: Communist League of Tampa
date: 2015
description: Written by 'jurassic marx' for the Communist League of Tampa's blog, <https://communistleaguetampa.org/2015/08/19/weekend-at-bernies/>.
...

_However fed up they may claim to be, a certain portion of the Left in
the United States remains sympathetic if not outright loyal to the
Democratic Party. Many of these people are coming to support the
candidacy of Bernie Sanders, and for them, the legacy of the postwar
American economy looms large. When not focusing on identity politics and
fear of republicans, Keynesian economic policy tends to be the
ideological basis of the left wing of the Democratic Party. However,
that same institution is incapable of bringing forth such reforms, not
only due to the capitalist nature of the organization, but also because
the leadership understands, at least unconsciously, that such reforms
are impossible in the current historical moment._

In the dark comedy classic Weekend at Bernie's, two reformist insurance
employees discover the corpse of their boss at his weekend beach house.
In order to protect their lives and keep the party going, they spend the
rest of the film working to maintain the illusion that the lifeless
corpse of their boss is still alive and is having the time of his life.
To their surprise, and the delight of most of the unknowing spectators,
the ruse is successful, and the dead guy brings more joy to everyone who
encounters him as a corpse than he probably would have were he still
alive.

Bernie Sanders has frequently identified himself in interviews speeches
etc. as a "socialist." When pressed as to what this means, he usually
mentions something about Sweden and/or sticks the "democratic" moniker
in front of it, presumably to be less scary. Yet Sanders is deliberately
appealing to something bigger and more powerful than what is normally
found within the bounds of typical political rhetoric. While most of the
Democratic Party stoically marches right, Sanders has veered left,
raising the specter of old school populism and attempting to appeal to
growing outrage over economic inequality. His seemingly unpolished
style, appearing and talking like your old socialist uncle who probably
still mimeographs his own newsletters, Sanders appeals to the legacy of
American unionism and a nostalgia for its former strength. During this
period of escalating election time hype it is important to remember that
this remains within a framework of mainstream left-of-center politics.
By using his position within Democratic Party primary politics, Sanders
has drawn more attention to this type of rhetoric than one might have
thought feasible. Since Sanders has nowhere to go but up, this has been
the key to his appeal. Raise the specter of working class strength,
state directed social development, and populist economic outrage, but
contain it within a palatable framework and channel it into the old
political currents. This is nothing new. If anything this is the new
normal. This same self-congratulatory politics could be seen during the
2008 Obama campaign. In his tone and diction Obama sought to subtly
evoke the legacy of Martin Luther King, and would later famously install
a bust of the man in the Oval Office. Today the Eugene Debs poster in
Sander's office is a similar object of note for reporters. Obama also
acted as insurgent candidate against Clinton, filling a necessary power
vacuum in the Democratic Party's shallow bench of celebrity politicians.
Obama promised a new kind of politics, albeit of a vaguer sort than
Sanders, and sailed in on a wave of popular outrage toward the Bush
administration and panic at the sudden emergence of the economic crisis.
During Obama's rise, all of the usual useful idiots pressed the line,
excited that someone is able to appeal to loftier notions in anything
resembling a mainstream context. To his credit, Sanders policies and
political history go slightly deeper than Obama's, but at the same time
this poses a greater hurdle for him. A good deal of the Democratic Party
base identifies as moderate or conservative. If Sanders hopes to
actually secure a nomination, like Obama or anyone else, he will be
forced to make concessions to those components of the party. All of this
is moot anyway. Whether or not Sanders gets the nomination, or even if
he somehow gets elected, the Democratic Party as a whole and as an
institution is both unwilling to and incapable of implementing the kind
of economic policy Sanders is touting. For now, Sanders has skillfully
exceeded the extremely low expectations surrounding his candidacy and
made great strides in closing the gap in the polls against Hillary
Clinton. There has been a great deal of euphoria on some sectors of the
American Left (to the extent that a Left can be said to exist in
America). There has also been a growing chorus of dissident voices
pointing out that Sanders platform is much less radical than some are
touting it as. I suppose that I stand in the latter camp, but rather
than listing the numerous political sins he's probably committed over
the years through his special relationship with the democrats, instead
I'm going to examine and critique some of the assumptions underlying his
appeal and then briefly look at just how meaningless Sanders conception
of socialism really is.

## Reformism and Neo-Liberalism

The extent to which one can place hope in reformist efforts today,
depends in part as to one's conception of neo-liberalism. It can be
tough to characterize the economic opinions of the Left, since so little
of it can be said to hold any kind of economic conception of capitalism.
For many people, in today's environment Clintonite stooge Robert Reich
has come to constitute some kind of substantial economic guru for many
people. Still, a unifying theme, from soft Marxists like David Harvey
and Richard Woolf to liberal reformists like Robert Reich is that the
period encompassing neo-liberalism roughly amounts to an attack on the
working and middle classes by the rich. That the gutting of US
manufacturing, international trade deals, the welfare state, and dying
off of trade unions was the result of a concerted effort, lead on a
political front by greedy elites who were not satisfied with the
previous equilibrium that had been established in the economy. This
skillfully and self-servingly reduces structural economic problems to a
question of political leadership, and from this standpoint, it makes
sense to expect that the United States could return to "peace and
prosperity" through the policy decisions of elected officials.
Unfortunately this picture does not conform to the reality of the last
forty years or capitalism in general.

Capitalists and state planners have adopted neo-liberal economic
strategies for a reason. Liberals and soft soc-dems like to paint
different accumulation strategies as "irrational" as a basis for
justifying opposition and advocating for reform. What all of this
ignores is how, under capitalism, the fate of the working class is tied
to the needs and trajectory of capitalist accumulation. Following the
great depression, and a series of escalating strike waves in
manufacturing, a post-war boom in economic prosperity affected many
sectors of the American working class. Relatively generous welfare and
more progressive tax rates were feasible and prosperous policies in the
wake of a robust profit rate. Fueled by the massive capital devaluation
of the depression at home, and the literal devaluation of resources as
an outcome of the war, the United States emerged as the strongest
manufacturing center for a growing and rebuilding world market. Decades
of militant labor agitation had strengthened the position of the
American working class, allowing it to bargain for a greater portion of
the surplus. Constituting a sort of golden period for the "middle
class," the mid-1940s-(1960s) far from being the norm, instead
constituted a sort of detente between certain sections of the working
class and capital. This came to a halt in the wake of the financial
crisis of the 1970's.

Following the war, Western European and Japanese manufacturers were able
to enter the world market with newer machinery operating at higher rates
of productivity. Combined with a precarious workforce and targeted
market development, these economies were able to undercut American
producers, many of whom were still holding fixed capital assets that had
yet to yield their full returns. Typically, as in the Great Depression,
such crises are followed by a period of capital devaluation. Instead,
capitalists opted for a different set of strategies to avert crisis and
maintain the course of capital accumulation. Amongst these strategies
were privatization, financialization, debt expansion, and a host of
strategies to manage increasing surplus populations (incarceration,
education, underemployment). What is important to understand is that
this turn was driven by the trajectory of the capitalist economy, and
not simply reducible to "corporate greed." The rising organic
composition runs as an undercurrent to all of this and has never been
satisfactorily addressed. Instead what we have are increasingly
sophisticated forms of state economic management. This does not meant
that politics are in command, just the opposite, that the state is
necessarily commanded by the needs of the economy.

The politician must understand just as well as the capitalist that all
functioning of the state is predicated on the maintenance of a robust
profit rate. Policies which have a negative effect on the increasingly
precarious capitalist growth are a nonstarter, and even those proposing
them will typically recoil when forced to consider the real consequences
of their decisions (see Syriza). Attempting to bring back Keynesian
style redistributive policies under completely different historical
economic and political circumstances would be foolish and unrealistic
without a militant fighting working class which was fully prepared to
tank the capitalist economy in order to build a new one. In periods of a
decreasing underlying profit rate, such reforms would heighten class
antagonisms and social contradictions rather than reconcile them. And
that is far from the story Sanders and company are selling. When
leftists go around promising that easy reform and robust economic
development can go hand in hand, all they are doing is setting the stage
for reaction. Fortunately, we know they are not serious. For Democrats,
these ideas can only prove useful to the extent that they will never be
realized. But the show must go on, and so they'll raise the corpse of
liberalism every so often, bask in the glow of the party, and return to
business as usual the next day. Cause if you step back, from a distance
and at a glance these appear to be serious measures. Look at all these
people in the crowds, they're so excited. This many people can't be
getting worked up for nothing, right?

## Democratic Party: Unfit for the Working Class

Sanders has spoken of running his campaign "more like a movement" but
the fact that he is choosing to lead his "political revolution" within
the Democratic Party, and has promised to support whoever the candidate
would be (read: Hillary Clinton) should tell anyone who is serious about
some kind of substantial political change everything they need to know.
But for the sake of clarity, let's briefly review why it is the
Democratic Party is unfit to bring about the kind of change the
proletariat needs and many sections of its own base would like to see.

The relationship between the Democratic Party and the American Working
class has been opportunistic from the very beginning. Representing the
slaveholding interests in the South, the Party used class discontent in
the north between workers and bosses as a part of its overall strategy
to retain its political foothold in the federal government. Even after
the Civil War, this basic class arrangement remained in place, embodied
as late as the 1960's in the white southern populism of George Wallace.
Going forward, after the destruction of slavery, the Democrats acted as
a force of loyal opposition to the industrial expansionism of the
Republican Party. For many however, this is irrelevant. Instead they
point to the New Deal of FDR, and Great Society Legislation of Lyndon
Johnson in order to shore up political credibility for the Democratic
Party. This relies on a form of historical amnesia in which the broader
context of each administration is completely forgotten, and this kind of
lineage of peace and prosperity is projected across administrations from
FDR to Carter to Clinton and sometimes even Obama. In the same breath,
the historical lineage tracing back to the Democratic defense of slavery
and its current complicity in imperialism is completely disavowed. If we
understand the Democratic Party not as the vanguard of American Leftism,
or even a bulwark against rightists, but instead as a recuperation
mechanism for a particular faction of the ruling class, the political
continuities and discontinuities between administrations and eras comes
into much clearer focus.

The first Democratic Party president that leftists will point to is
Franklin Delano Roosevelt. Kennedy left little of substance behind
during his short tenure as president, and Johnson's legacy, in spite of
his welfare and civil rights legislation, is remains largely tainted for
many by the Vietnam War. By contrast FDR stands as architect of "the
good war," savior of the economy, and redistributor of wealth. However
FDR's New Deal can only be understood within the context of American
Capitalism of that era. At the beginning of the twentieth century, the
American Working class was gaining serious ground in developing its own
political organs and institutions. This era saw the rise of trade
Unionism in the AFL and CIO, the fighting syndicalism of the IWW, the
developing socialist parties as well as the Communist Party USA. However
imperfect these organizations were, their existence indicated a
possibility of an American working class capable of asserting itself as
an independent political force. Perhaps more importantly wildcat strikes
had been taking off in the United States and would continue to escalate
through his administration and well through the war. Workers were thus
taking on modes of direct action independent of the developing
bureaucracies of the representatives of labor. All this boded poorly for
the American ruling class, who had enjoyed a relative degree of
political hegemony in comparison to much of what had taken place in
Western Europe. FDR rode into office on top of a massive economic
crisis, and governed in the shadow of dictatorships throughout Europe
and growing inter-imperialist conflict globally. FDR's reforms fell well
short of the demands implicit in the actions of the American working
class at the time. His penultimate solution, a war economy, served to
redirect the trajectory of production and after the war served to place
the U.S. as the foremost global superpower. This mode of war production,
later termed the "military industrial complex" has been more or less in
place ever since. The coexistence of state expansion and welfare
spending and a broader imperialist spending and foreign policy could be
seen in starker relief under the Johnson administration decades later.
While the military spending has remained more or less invariant and
essential to capitalist accumulation in the United States, the
particular class, economic and historical conditions that produced the
former reforms have been gradually eaten away at ever since, often with
the direct complicity of the very Democrats who are allegedly supposed
to prevent this. Yet still we are promised a return to this, and Sanders
brand of cruise missile socialism continues it. Herein lies the focal
weak point of Sanders form of left-liberalism. In spite of the
frequently hysterical anti-war activism of the left ("no blood for oil
man") here sits no room in this outlook for any meaningful
internationalism. When military spending is even seen as a problem, it
is understood either as simply an irrational expenditure, or it is
opposed on moral terms, as if the U.S. economy received no material
benefits from its imperial hegemony and all spending could simply be
shifted to infrastructural development with no economic downside.

For many, the strongest case to be made for Sanders insurgent candidacy
to be made stems from the fear of repeating the example of Ralph Nader,
who acted as a "spoiler" in the 2000 presidential election. In spite of
the largely inconclusive evidence regarding Nader's role, this event has
loomed large in the liberal mindset, turning Nader from being the
reformist hero of the 1970's into a pariah responsible from everything
from the War in Iraq to 9/11 depending on who you talk to. What followed
in the subsequent anti-War movement was a redoubling of efforts in
support of the Democratic candidacy, leading to the pathetic spectacle
of John Kerry's run. But what is strange, even on its own terms, about
the "lesser of two evils" argument his how the people making it paint
this grim picture of our current situation but seldom paint any kind of
portrait of how to get out of it except through acquiescence to it. This
might have made a modicum of sense to the politically naive during the
height of the anti-bush anti-war demonstrations in 2003, but after
nearly 8 years of a democratic administration, and following the failure
of a Democratic majority to pass meaningful health care reform that
wasn't just a glorified coupon system, the Democrats today are in sore
need of credibility. After decades of moving to the right and an eight
year presidential term that has produced little reform to speak of, it
is becoming I think increasingly difficult for Democrats to sidestep the
glaring contradictions between what is expected of them and what they
actually do, facilitated in part through the increasingly open
information exchange of the internet. Sanders may represent a last ditch
effort to recoup the left wing of the party and get people
#readyforhillary. What both Sanders, and Nader missed was the basis of
political power. Nader believed that it was necessary to build a
political institution outside of the Democratic Party. However the
Greens have no basis in a strong class capable of acting politically,
and their platform remains a sterner variation on the basic liberal
schema.

## Really Ideal Socialism

A great deal of the novelty surrounding Sanders campaign is his refusal
to completely disavow the term "socialist" whenever it is applied to
him. Partly this represents a form of savvy on his part, it is said that
Obama's poll numbers went up the more the term was applied to him by his
detractors, and partly it serves as a useful rhetorical maneuver. At the
same time, the seemingly increasing receptivity to more leftish politics
suggests something about our current moment.

Sander's vague allusions to Scandinavia and Democratic Socialism, seldom
run into the concrete or even link up directly with his policy
proposals. Instead it serves as more of a rhetorical function. Even as
we near the 30th anniversary of the collapse of the Soviet Union, red
baiting remains useful for rightists, and an effective measure for
shutting down any discussion of reform or even any criticism of the
current acceptable functioning of capitalism, no matter how minor.
Thanks to the sustainable functioning of the Scandinavian welfare
states, left-liberals have a relatively inoffensive model they can point
to. In other words, Sander's "socialism" is really just a way for him to
call the bluff of rightists his actual policies themselves are liberal
reformist at best.

Historically, socialism as a political goal amounted to more than simply
generous welfare spending, public works programs, or highly progressive
taxation. Socialism was a project to overcome capitalism and transition
to a higher, better mode of society. Even in the classical Social
Democratic Party of Germany, the philistine right theorist Edward
Bernstein, in all of his gradualist reformism, agreed that capitalism
was only a transitional point to socialism. In fact, insofar as he was
convinced that said transition was inevitable, he was far more
optimistic about the prospects of proletarian triumph than most leftists
or even many Marxists today. Sanders and the rest of the "socialism
worked in Sweden" school, cannot even comprehend or envision mankind's
social transformation through history. It ignores the class basis of
most of the political parties which implemented the said reforms, and it
ignores the limitations of the nation state. The Scandinavian examples,
as beneficial as they may be for the people living there, are just as
symptomatic of the failure of socialism as its success. Because in both
cases, and this is true for Europe to a lesser extent, the very national
basis of such a system presupposes an anti-immigration politics. Because
the benefits and higher wages are secured for a certain set of workers
through the reproduction of the particular state and national economy,
it must necessarily exclude other workers from entering the economy at a
faster rate than growth allows them to integrate, as well as take a
place within the broader international system of capitalism. This being
the case, it should come as no surprise that Sanders has such shitty
attitudes toward immigration:

>"Open borders? No, that's a Koch brothers proposal ... That's a
>right-wing proposal, which says essentially there is no United
>States ... It would make everybody in America poorer ... You're doing
>away with the concept of a nation state, and I don't think there's any
>country in the world that believes in that..."

If you turned the last sentence on its head, you might have a statement
from an actual socialist. It is entirely inconceivable to Sanders that
the abolition of nation states could be something desirable or necessary
as an eventual goal. This glaring but inadvertent cluelessness is fairly
typical of old-school unionist DP politics. Sanders doubles down on
state protectionism. He even goes so far as to threaten to put the genie
back in the bottle on NAFTA, as if all the Mexican farms run off the
land by American agri-business will somehow re-sprout again and the
"illegals" will just go back home to their plows. As of yet, Sanders
offers no vision on how he might control capital flight, or do anything
to deal with the cheaper labor and newer equipment that inevitably
emerges in a world market. A globalized market only points even more
starkly for international organization and solidarity of the poor and
working classes worldwide. Instead Sanders hopes to recreate some kind
of accord between the working class and the ruling class. He refers to
this accord as "the middle class," and he refers to it often. This sort
of nationalist strategy of cross-class amelioration in the form of
expanding the old buffer is, in the light of a genuine class politics,
fundamentally reactionary.

## The Communist Line

Finally, this brings us to the question: what does the phenomenon of the
Bernie Sanders campaign mean for Communists? It is very easy to adopt an
oppositional stance, and begin rattling off a laundry list of Bernie
Sander's political sins, but I think it is even more important for
Communists to cut right to the heart of the matter. Bernie Sanders is
not a socialist, because Bernie Sanders does not seek to move society
beyond capitalism. A socialist program must be necessarily transitional
to Communism, or it will necessarily transition to failure.

If Sanders represents and capitalizes upon a reviving interest in
socialism, then it is our task to clarify what socialism really is and
what it means. We must critique the limitations of Sanders overall
strategy, and in the process underline what directions things must take
in order for there to be real change. We cannot look to sell people on
easy magic bullet solutions either with the intention of winning
people's interest or counting on such solutions tanking in order to
prepare people for the "real alternative." Instead we should recognize
that people are beginning to recognize some of the limitations of
Democratic Party politics. We should push them further. Another
component of this as that a lot of mainstream American news and politics
runs on fear. The truly skilled politician knows how to transcend this
and appear to offer people something beyond this schema, it's not for
nothing that the central word of Obama's campaign was "Hope." In his
promises of reform, and his seemingly different way of doing things
Sanders appeals to a similar mindset. In deconstructing the politics of
the Left, we must at the same time point to an alternative politics and
a vision for a higher and better form of society. Still, even within
this, it is hard to escape the nexus of the current political schema.
What is required perhaps more than anything else is a longer and deeper
view both of the past and of the future. So long as the lessons and
implications of history are ignored, any capacity to imagine future
change or long term development will remain necessarily stunted. We must
not only oppose all bourgeois political parties, but also the conception
that the outlook of our political horizons cannot extend beyond the next
four years.

## The Party is Over

Weekend at Bernie's ends with the two main characters getting everything
they wanted. An assassin goes mad repeatedly attempting to kill Bernie,
and is convinced he is still alive even when he is being taken to jail.
The two young men get to keep their jobs, one gets the girl, and the
corpse slips out of the ambulance to fall on the beach and be
symbolically buried by an indignant youth. So far Sanders has been able
to placate the latter element, but if the savvy activists and staff of
his campaign have their way, they can take this thing all the way to the
general election. There might be more appeal to the Sanders pitch than
it seems. Republicans could come off as hysterical (as they did with
Obama) crying socialist and communist long after the DP party
mainstream, or anyone else, have ceased to really believe it. Whether he
wins or is forced to go back to his Senate seat, at the end of all this,
careers will be made. And Sanders and his specter of sewer socialism
will be wheeled back to be buried in the place that all American working
class politics go to die: Washington DC.
