---
title: The Russia We Love and Defend
author: Damen, Onorato
date: 1943
description: Published in December 1943 in the International Communist Party's publication Prometeo. From <https://www.marxists.org/archive/damen/1943/love-russia.htm>.
...

It is no accident that today we communists, the unwavering supporters
and defenders of the Russian Revolution, of its ideas and of its first
actions, have to defend ourselves from the accusation of now being
against this great historic experience. This accusation is thrown at us
by those who were the Revolution's most open and ferocious enemies
during the period when the bourgeois liberal and social democratic
coalition tried to strangle it either militarily with mercenary banditry
or through starvation; and sought to isolate it from the capitalist
world behind a barbed wire fence of defamation and conspiracy.

Such a complete change of mind, and of political sympathy, towards
Russia is much less surprising than may be imagined. In the light of
Marxism it is easily understandable. Today this sympathy and solidarity
runs from the Church to the captains of industry, from the Socialists to
the magnates of high finance.

We are not amongst these; and the workers who have defended, and still
defend Russia as the first great experiment of their class, have to
finally understand the reason why we communists do not hesitate to state
our opposition to the Russia of Stalin while, at the same time, we
proclaim ourselves faithful fighters for the Russia of Lenin.

For us the revolutionary events were not insignificant trifles and we
adhere completely to the ideas of October through our absolute
dedication to the cause of the Russian Revolution, the beginning of the
international revolution. For more than twenty years most of us have
given everything to its cause: financial interests, family affections,
freedom, often ending up in prison, internment or concentration camps.
And so it is that the thankless, but necessary and inescapable task of
not remaining silent on the truth about Russia therefore falls to us. We
have learned in the school of Marxism to struggle openly and firmly
against myths, against any kind of 'taboo', and for the most concrete
truths of the class struggle.

And before we set out our ideas we would like those workers who have
held on to their critical capacities, and whose class instincts have not
been contaminated, to consider the real reasons which lie behind the
profound and sudden solidarity of so many bourgeois reactionaries with
the Russia of today, and from which we can define its true nature. For
ourselves, we want to clarify here some aspects of this vexed problem
and we are sure we shall all reach the same conclusions.

1. The bourgeoisie's passionate and noisy love for Stalin's Russia is a
direct result of their interest in preserving the capitalist system. It
follows from this that what we love, the bourgeoisie through class
antagonism, naturally hates. When our theoretical critique and our
Party's actions put us at the forefront of the class struggle, the
bourgeoisie cannot stomach it.

2. The legitimisation of the Second imperialist war in Stalinist
"people's war for democracy," and the official recognition by the
Orthodox Church which naturally supported the war for the great Slav
fatherland, has deeply impressed the honest bourgeois who are always
full of love for the fatherland. To legitimise the war meant to tie the
working masses to it, to chain them to that most brutal and hateful
force, chauvinism, in order to make victory certain, and with it the
salvation of capital.

3. The Bolshevisation of the Russian (Communist) Party and the
International, the liquidation in these bodies of leading organised
expressions of the proletariat and their substitution by the stupid
servants of opportunism, the inequalities in wages which inevitably
restored social differences; the role assumed by the State and party
bureaucracy, the dominance of the class of technicians which came from
forced industrialisation and the rise of the Church as a prominent
force; the pre-eminence of the State in the place of the dictatorship of
proletariat; the Five Year Plans for the intensive exploitation of a
re-created subject class of workers -- these are all the surface
features which confirm that the interests of Russia are no longer those
of the proletariat ... At this point those who have ditched the
revolution deemed it opportune to demonstrate their loyalty and
consistency of the new direction in Russian policy to the international
bourgeoisie, sacrificing on the altar of democratic concord the men of
the old guard, the incorruptible builders of the October Revolution.
This is the Russia dear to the hearts of Roosevelt, of Churchill and all
international radicals -- but it is not ours.

4. The Russia which we love and defend, as a revolutionary achievement,
is that Russia of the proletariat and poor peasantry who under the
guidance of Lenin and the revolutionary party dared to break the
framework of feudalism and capitalism and to pose the class dictatorship
-- the transitional proletarian state power whose goal has to be to
signal the destruction of that very state and that very class. The
Russia which we love and defend is that Russia which for years its
proletariat and to the international proletariat the consciousness of
its force, the historic sense of its revolutionary role, the organic
demonstration of the new workers' world that has its creative heart in
the 'Soviets'.

The Russia which we love and defend is that Russia which for years had
to operate clandestinely in the shadow of the present 'Bolshevik' Party
and which in the prisons, in the deportations throughout the Russian
wastes preserved intact its faith in the principles of October and which
is waiting for the time when it will be able to unite its revolutionary
re-awakening with that of the international proletariat. This is the
Russia of our anti-bourgeois struggle, the Russia of our unchanging
revolutionary passion.
