---
title: Critique of the Situationist International
author: DauvÃ©, Gilles
date: 1979
description: The following text has been based off the [libcom.org](https://libcom.org/library/critique-situationist-international-gilles-dauve) version of the article. The text, with greater detail on it's background can also be found on [John Gray's Website](https://www.oocities.org/~johngray/barsit01.htm), from which the footnotes for this text have been taken.
...

# Ideology and the Wage System

Capitalism transforms life into the money necessary for living. One
tends to do any particular thing towards an end other than that implied
by the content of the activity. The logic of alienation: one is an
other; the wage system makes one foreign to what one does, to what one
is, to other people.

Now, human activity does not produce only goods and relationships, but
also representations. Man is not homo faber: the reduction of human life
to the economy (since taken up by official marxism) dates from the
enthronement of capital. All activity is symbolic: it creates, at one
and the same time, products and a vision of the world. The layout of a
primitive village:

> summarizes and assures the relations between Man and the universe,
> between society and the supernatural world, between the living and the
> dead. (Levi-Strauss).

The fetishism of commodities is merely the form taken by this symbolism
in societies dominated by exchange.

As capital tends to produce everything as capital, to parcelize
everything so as to recompose it with the help of market relations, it
also makes of representation a specialized sector of
production. Stripped of the means of their material existence,
wage-workers are also stripped of the means of producing their ideas,
which are produced by a specialized sector (whence the role of the
"intellectuals", a term introduced in France by the Manifesto of the
\[dreyfusite\] Intellectuals, 1898). The proletarian receives these
representations (ideas, images, implicit associations, myths) as he
receives from capital the other aspects of his life. Schematically
speaking, the nineteenth century worker produced his ideas (even
reactionary ones) at the cafe, the bar or the club, while today's worker
sees his on television -- a tendency which it would certainly be absurd
to extrapolate to the point of reducing to it all of reality.

Marx defined ideology as the substitute for a real but impossible
change: the change is lived at the level of the imaginary. Modern man is
in this situation as extended to every realm. He no longer transforms
anything except into images. He travels so as to rediscover the
stereotype of the foreign country; loves so as to play the role of the
virile lover or the tender beloved etc. Deprived of labor
(transformation of environment and self) by wage-labor, the proletarian
lives the "spectacle" of change.

The present-day wage-worker does not live in "abundance" in relation to
the nineteenth-century worker who lived in "poverty". The wage-worker
does not simply consume objects, but reproduces the economic and mental
structures which weigh on him. It is because of this, contrary to the
opinion of Invariance, that he cannot free himself of these
representations except by suppressing their material basis. He lives in
a community of semiotics which force him to continue: materially
(credit), ideologically and psychologically (this community is one of
the few available). One does not only consume signs: the constraints are
as much, and first of all, economic (bills to be paid, etc.). Capital
rests on the production and sale of objects. That these objects also
function as signs (and sometimes as that above all) is a fact, but this
never annuls their materiality. Only intellectuals believe themselves to
be living in a world made purely of signs[^2].

# True and False

What are the consequences for the revolutionary movement of the "the
function of social appearances in modern capitalism" (I.S. 10, p. 79) ?
As Marx and Dejacque[^3] put it, communism has always been the dream of
the world. Today, the dream also serves not to change reality. One
cannot content oneself with "telling" the truth: this can only exist as
practice, as relationship between subject and object, saying and doing,
expression and transformation, and manifests itself as tension. The
"false" is not a screen which blocks the view. The "true" exists within
the false, in Le Monde or on television, and the "false" within the
true, in texts which are revolutionary or which claim to be. The false
asserts itself through its practice, by the use which it makes of the
truth: the true is so only in transformation. Revolutionary activity
that locates itself in what it says on this side of what the radio says
is a semi-futility. Let us measure the gap between words and
reality. The S.I. demanded that revolutionaries not dazzle with
words. Revolutionary theory is not made revolutionary by itself, but by
the capacity of those who possess it to put it to subversive use not by
a sudden flash, but by a mode of presentation and diffusion which leaves
traces, even if scarcely visible ones. The denunciation of Leftists, for
example, is secondary. Making it the axis of activity leads to not
dealing with fundamental questions for the purposes of polemic against
this or that group. Acting in this way modifies the content of ideas and
actions. One addresses the essential only through denunciations, and the
denunciation quickly becomes the essential.

Face to face with the multiplication of individuals and texts with
radical pretensions, the S.I. obliges one to ask: is this theory the
product of a subversive social relation seeking its expression, or a
production of ideas being diffused without contributing to a practical
unification? Everyone listens to the radio, but radio sets unify
proletarians in the service of capital -- until the day when these
technical means are seized by revolutionary proletarians, at which time
one hour of broadcasting will be worth years of previous
"propaganda"[^4].

However, the "end of ideology" does not mean that there could be a
society without ideas, functioning automatically, like a machine: this
would presuppose a "robotized" and thus a non-"human" society, since it
would be deprived of the necessary reaction of its members. Having
become an ideology in the sense of The German Ideology, the imaginary
develops exactly along these lines. There is no dictatorship of social
relations which remote-controls us, without reaction and reflection on
our part. This is a very partial vision of "barbarism". The mistake in
descriptions of completely totalitarian societies (Orwell's 1984 or the
film THX 1138) is that they do not see that all societies, even the most
oppressive, presuppose the intervention and action of human beings in
their unfolding. Every society, including and especially capitalist
society, lives on these tensions, even though it risks being destroyed
by them. The critique of ideology denies neither the role of ideas nor
that of collective action in propagating them.

# The Theoretical Deadend of the Notion of the "Spectacle"

The notion of the spectacle unites a large number of given basic facts
by showing society -- and thus its revolutionary transformation -- as
activity. Capitalism does not "mystify" the workers. The activity of
revolutionaries does not demystify; it is the expression of a real
social movement. The revolution creates a different activity whose
establishment is a condition of what classical revolutionary theory
called "political" tasks (destruction of the State).

But the S.I. was not able to conceive in this way of the notion which it
had brought to light. It invested so much in this notion that it
reconstructed the whole of revolutionary theory around the spectacle.

In its theory of "bureaucratic capitalism", Socialisme ou Barbarie (S ou
B) had capital rest on the bureaucracy. In its theory of "spectacular
commodity society", the S.I. explained everything from the
spectacle. One does not construct a revolutionary theory except as a
whole, and by basing it on what is fundamental to social life. No, the
question of "social appearances" is not the key to any new revolutionary
endeavor (I.S. \#10, p. 79).

The traditional revolutionary groups had only seen new means of
conditioning. But for the S.I., the mode of expression of the "media"
corresponds to a way of life which did not exist a hundred years
ago. Television does not indoctrinate, but inscribes itself into a mode
of being. The S.I. showed the relationship between the form and
foundation, where traditional marxism saw nothing but new instruments in
the service of the same cause.

Meanwhile, the notion of the spectacle elaborated by the S.I. falls
behind what Marx and Engels understood by the term "ideology". Debord's
book _The Society of the Spectacle_ presents itself as an attempt to
explain capitalist society and revolution, when in fact it only
considers their forms, important but not determinant phenomena. It robes
the description of them in a theorization which gives the impression of
a fundamental analysis, when in fact the method, and the subject being
studied, remain always at the level of social appearances. At this
level, the book is outstanding. The trouble is that it is written (and
read) as if one were going to find something in it that isn't
there. While _S ou B_ analyzed the revolutionary problem by means of
industrial sociology, the S.I. analyzes it starting out from a
reflection on the surface of society. This is not to say that The
Society of the Spectacle is superficial. Its contradiction and,
ultimately, its theoretical and practical dead-end, is to have made a
study of the profound, through and by means of the superficial
appearance. The S.I. had no analysis of capital: it understood it, but
through its effects. It criticized the commodity, not capital - or
rather, it criticized capital as commodity, and not as a system of
valuation which includes production as well as exchange.

Throughout the book, Debord remains at the stage of circulation, lacking
the necessary moment of production, of productive labor. What nourishes
capital is not consumption, as he leads one to understand, but the
formation of value by labor. Debord is right to see more in the relation
between appearance and reality than in that between illusion and the
reality, as if appearances did not exist. But one never understands the
real on the basis of the apparent. Thus Debord does not complete his
project. He does not show how capitalism makes what is only the result
into the cause or even into the movement. The critique of political
economy (which Debord does not make, content to ignore it as were the
utopians before him) shows how the proletarian sees standing over and
against him not only his product, but his activity. In the fetishism of
commodities, the commodity appears as its own movement. By the fetishism
of capital, capital takes on an autonomy which it does not possess,
presenting itself as a living being (Invariance is a victim of this
illusion): one does not know where it comes from, who produces it, by
what process the proletarian engenders it, by what contradiction it
lives and may die. Debord makes the spectacle into the subject of
capitalism, instead of showing how it is produced by capitalism. He
reduces capitalism to its spectacular dimension alone. The movement of
capital becomes the movement of the spectacle. In the same way
_Banalites de base_[^5] makes a history of the spectacle through
religion, myth, politics, philosophy, etc. This theory remains limited
to a part of the real relations, and goes so far as to make them rest
entirely on this part.

The spectacle is activity become passive. The S.I. rediscovered what
Marx said in the Grundrisse about the rising-up of Man's being (his
self-transformation, his labor) as an alien power which crushes him:
facing it, he no longer lives, he only looks. The S.I. brought a new
vigor to this theme. But capital is more than pacification. It needs the
intervention of the proletarian, as _S ou B_[^6] said. The S.I.'s
overestimation of the spectacle is the sign that it theorizes on the
basis of a social vision born at the periphery of society, and which it
believed to be central.

# The Spectacle and the Theory of Art

The theory of the spectacle expresses the crisis of the space-time
outside labor. Capital more and more creates a realm outside of labor
according to the logic of its economy: it does not develop leisure to
control the masses, but because it reduces living labor to a lesser role
in production, diminishes labor-time, and adds to the wage-worker's time
of inactivity. Capital creates for the wage-workers a space-time that is
excluded, empty, because consumption never succeeds in filling it
completely. To speak of space-time is to insist on the fact that there
is a reduction in the working day, and that this freed time also
occupies a geographical and social space, in particular the street
(c.f. the importance of the city and of the derive[^17] for the S.I.).

This situation coincides with a dual crisis of "art". Firstly, art no
longer has meaning because Western society doesn't know where it's
going. With 1914, the West lost the meaning and direction of
civilization. Scientism, liberalism and apologetics for the "liberating"
effect of productive forces went bankrupt like their adversaries
(Romanticism, etc.). From then on, art was to be tragic, narcissistic,
or the negation of itself. In former periods of crisis, one sought the
meaning of the world: today, one doubts if it has one. Secondly, the
colonization of the market and the vain and frenzied search for a
"direction" enlist the artist in the service of consumption outside of
labor.

The S.I. is conscious of its social origin. _Sur le passage de quelques
personnes..._ (1959), one of Debord's films, speaks of people "on the
margin of the economy." On this terrain, like _S ou B_ on the terrain of
the enterprise, the S.I. understood that modern capitalism tends to
exclude people from all activity and at the same time to engage them in
a pseudo participation. But, like _S ou B_, it makes a decisive
criterion out of the contradiction between active and
passive. Revolutionary practice consists of breaking the very principle
of the spectacle: non-intervention (I.S. \# 1, p. 110). At the end of
the process, the workers council will be the means of being active, of
breaking down separation. Capital endures by the exclusion of human
beings, their passivity. What moves in the direction of a refusal of
passivity is revolutionary. Hence the revolutionary is defined by "a new
style of life" which will be an "example" (I.S. \#6, p. 4).

The realm outside labor rests on bonds that are more contingent
(c.f. the derive) and subjective than wage labor, which belongs more to
the necessary and the objective. To the traditional economy, the
S.I. opposes "an economy of desires" (I.S. \#7, p. 16); to necessity, it
opposes freedom; to effort, pleasure; to labor, the automation which
makes it unnecessary; to sacrifice, delight. The S.I. reverses the
oppositions which must be superceded. Communism does not free one from
the necessity of labor, it overthrows "labor" itself (as a separate and
alien activity - Tr.). The S.I. identifies revolution with a liberation
from constraints, based on desire and first of all on the desire for
others, the need for relationships. It makes the link between
"situation" and "labor" badly, which limits its notion of the
situation. It thinks of society and its revolution from the context of
non-wage-earning social layers. Hence, it carries over onto the
productive proletariat what it said about those who are outside the wage
system (street gangs, ghetto blacks). Because it was ignorant of the
center of gravity of the movement, the S.I. moved toward councilism: the
councils permit a "direct and active communication" (Society of the
Spectacle). The revolution appeared as the extension of the construction
of intersubjective situations to the whole of society.

The critique of the S.I. passes through the recognition of its
"avant-garde artist" aspect. Its sociological origin often provokes
abusive and absurd interpretations of the "they were petty-bourgeois"
variety. The question is clearly elsewhere. In the case of the S.I., it
theorized from its own social experience. The S.I.'s artistic origin is
not a stigma in itself; but it leaves its mark on theory and evolution
when the group envisages the world from the point of view of its
specific social layer. The passing to a revolutionary theory and action
that were general (no longer aimed only at art, urbanism, etc.)
corresponds to a precise logic on the S.I.'s part. The S.I. says that
each new issue of its journal can and must allow one to re-read all the
previous issues in a new way. This is indeed the characteristic of a
theory which is growing richer, being enriched, and the opposite of S ou
B. It is not a matter of., on one side the general aspect of the S.I.,
and on the other its more or less critical relationship to art. The
critique of separation was its guiding thread. In art, as in the
council, in self-management, in workers' democracy and in organization
(c.f. its Minimum definition of revolutionary organizations), the
S.I. wanted to break down separation, to create a real community. While
the S.I. refused "questioning" la Cardan, it ended by adopting the
problematic of "participation" la Chaulieu.

# The S.I. and Socialisme ou Barbarie

In order to attain "the transparency of inter-subjective relations", the
S.I. wound up with the councilism supported by _S ou B_. The council is
the means of rediscovering unity. Debord met the _S ou B_ through
Canjuers and joined it for several months. His membership was not
mentioned in the S.I. journal. On the contrary: _La Veritable
Scission_[^8], speaking of Khayati, excludes on principle "a double
membership (in both the S.I. and another group) which would immediately
border on manipulation" (p. 85). However that may be, Debord
participated in the activities of _S ou B_, throughout the time he was a
member, notably taking part in the team that was sent to Belgium during
the great strike of 1960. At the end of an international meeting
organized by _S ou B_, which was at once deceptive and revealing of the
lack of perspectives, and which concluded with a pretentious speech by
Chaulieu on the tasks of _S ou B_, Debord announced his resignation. Not
without irony, he declared that he was in accord with the vast
perspectives outlined by Chaulieu, but that he did not feel equal to so
immense a task.

I.S. \#6 (1961) adopted the idea of the councils, if not councilism; in
any case it adopted the thesis of the division between "order-givers"
and "order-takers". The project which the S.I. set for itself in I.S. M,
comprising among others "the study without illusions of the classical
workers' movement" andof Marx, was not to be realized. The S.I. was to
remain ignorant of the reality of the communist left, particularly
Bordiga. The most radical of the revolutionary movement would always be
an improved _S ou B_. It saw theory through this filter.

Vaneigem's Banalites de base cheerfully bypasses Marx. and rewrites
history in the light of _S ou B_, while adding to it the critique of the
commodity. The S.I. criticized _S ou B_ but only in terms of degree: for
the S.I., _S ou B_ limited socialism to workers management, while in
fact it meant management of everything. Chaulieu confined himself to the
factory, Debord wanted to self-manage life. Vaneigem's procedure is
close to that of Cardan. He looks for a sign (evidence): no longer the
shameless exploitation of workers on the shop-floor, but the misery of
social relationships, there is the revolutionary detonator:

The feeble quality of the spectacle and of everyday life becomes the
only sign.

_La Veritable Scission_... would also speak of a sign of what was
unbearable. Vaneigem is against vulgar marxism, but he does not
integrate marxism into a critique. He does not assimilate what was
revolutionary about Marx that established marxism has obliterated. In
I.S. \#9 (1963), the S.I. still acknowledged that Cardan was "in
advance" of it.

Like Society of the Spectacle, Banalities de base situates itself at the
level of ideology and its contradictions. Vaneigem shows how religion
has become the spectacle, which obliges revolutionary theory to
criticize the spectacle as it once had to start out from a critique of
religion and philosophy. But in this way one obtains only the (pre)
condition of revolutionary theory: the work remains to be done. The
S.I. at first hoped for a lot from Lefebvre[^9] and Cardan, then
violently rejected them. But it kept in common with them the lack of
both a theory of capitalism and a theory of society. Toward 1960, it
opened up to new horizons but did not take the step. The S.I. confronted
value (c.f. Jorn's text on political economy and use value) but did not
recognize it for what it was. Its theory had neither centrality nor
globality. This led it to overestimate very diverse social movements,
without seeing the kernel of the problem.

It is, for example, incontestable that the article on Watts[^10] (\#9,
1964) is a brilliant theoretical breakthrough. Taking up in its own way
what might have been said about the exchange between Mauss and Bataille,
the S.I. posed the question of the modification of the very substance of
capitalist society. The article's conclusion even takes up once again
Marx's formulation about the link between Man and his generic nature,
taken up at the same time by Camatte in the P.C.I.[^11] (c.f. \#1 of
Invariance). But staying at the level of the commodity, the S.I. was
incapable of differentiating between the levels of society, and of
singling out what makes a revolution. When it writes that

> a revolt against the spectacle situates itself at the level of the
> totality...

it proves that it is making the spectacle into the totality. In the same
way its "managementist" illusions led it to distort the facts concerning
Algeria after Boumedienne's coup d'etat:

> The only program of the Algerians socialist elements is the defense of
> the self-managed sector, not only as it is, but as it ought to
> be. (\#9, 1964, p. 21).

In other words, without revolution, that is to say, without the
destruction of the State and key transformations in society, the
S.I. believed that there could be workers' management, and that
revolutionaries should work for its extension.

# Positive Utopia

The S.I. allows the recognition at the level of revolutionary activity
of the implications of the development of capital since 1914, already
recognized by the communist left insofar as this development involved
reformism, nations, wars, the evolution of the state, etc. The S.I. had
crossed the path of the communist left.

The S.I. understood the communist movement and the revolution as the
production by the proletarians of new relations to each other and to
"things". It rediscovered the Marxian idea of communism as the movement
of self-creation by men of their own relations. With the exception of
Bordiga, it was the first to connect again with the utopian
tradition. This was at once its strength and its ambiguity.

The S.I. was initially a revolt which sought to take back the cultural
means monopolized by money and power. Previously the most lucid artists
had wanted to break the separation between art and life: the S.I. raised
this demand to a higher level in their desire to abolish the distance
between life and revolution. "Experimentation" had been for surrealism
an illusory means of wrenching art out of its isolation from reality:
the S.I. applied it in order to found a positive utopia. The ambiguity
comes from the fact that the S.I. did not know exactly whether it was a
matter of living differently from now on or only of heading that way.

> The culture to be overthrown will not really fall except along with
> the totality of the socio-economic formation which upholds it. But,
> without further ado, the S.I. proposes to confront it throughout its
> length and breadth, up to and including the imposition of an
> autonomous situationist control and experimentation against those who
> hold the existing cultural authority(ies), i.e. up to and including a
> state of dual power within culture... The center of such a development
> within culture would first of all have to be UNESCO once the S.I. had
> taken command of it: a new type of popular university, detached from
> the old culture; lastly, utopian centers to be built which, in
> relation to certain existing developments in the social space of
> leisure, would have to be more completely liberated from the ruling
> daily life... would function as bridgeheads for a new invasion of
> everyday life. (\#5, 1960, pp. 5 & 31).

The idea of a gradual liberation is coherent with that of a
self-management spreading everywhere little by little: it misunderstands
society as a totality. Besides this, it grants privilege to "culture",
the "center of meaning of a meaningless society" (\#5, p. 5).

This exaggeration of the role of culture was later to be carried over
into workers' autonomy: the "power of the councils" was supposed to
spread until it occupied the whole of society. These two traits have
deep roots in the origins of the S.I.. The problem, then, is not that
the S.I. remained too "artistic" in the Bohemian sense, lacking in
"rigor" (as if the "Marxists" were rigorous), but that it applied the
same approach throughout.

The projects for "another" life were legion in the S.I.. I.S. \#6 (1961)
dealt with an experimental town. At the Goteborg conference, Vaneigem
spoke of constructing situationist bases, in preparation for a unitary
urbanism and a liberated life. This speech (says the account of the
proceeding) met with no opposition (\#7, 1962, p. 27).

One makes an organization: revolutionary groups "have no right to exist
as a permanent vanguard unless they themselves set the example of a new
style of life." (\#7, p. 16). The overestimation of organization and of
the responsibility of living differently now led, obviously, to a
self-overestimation of the S.I.. Trocchi declares in \#7:

> We envisage a situation in which life is continually renewed by art, a
> situation constructed by the imagination... we have already gone
> through enough experiences in a preparatory direction: we are ready to
> act. (pp. 50 & 53).

A significant fact: the critique of this article in the following issue
did not pick up on this aspect (\#8, pp. 3-5). Trocchi was to realize
this program in his own way in Project Sigma: the S.I. did not disavow
it, but only stated that Trocchi was not undertaking this project in his
capacity as a member of the S.I. (\#9, p. 83).

The ambiguity was brought to a head by Vaneigem who in fact wrote a
treatise on how to live differently in the present world while setting
forth what social relations could be. It is a handbook to violating the
logic of the market and the wage system wherever one can get away with
it. _La Veritable Scission_... has some harsh words for Vaneigem and his
book. Debord and Sanguinetti were right to speak of "exorcism":

> He has said so as not to be (p. 143).

No doubt. But the critique is belated. Vaneigem's book was a difficult
work to produce because it cannot be lived, threatened with falling on
the one hand into a marginal possibilism and on the other into an
imperative which is unrealizable and thus moral. Either one huddles in
the crevices of bourgeois society, or one ceaselessly opposes to it a
different life which is impotent because only the revolution can make it
a reality. The S.I. put the worst of itself into its worst
text. Vaneigem was the weakest side of the S.I., the one which reveals
all its weaknesses. The positive utopia is revolutionary as demand, as
tension, because it cannot be realized within this society: it becomes
derisory when one tries to live it today. Instead of hammering away at
Vaneigem as an individual, The Real Split... could have drawn up the
balance sheet of the practice which had produced Vaneigem, but there was
no such balance sheet (see below).

The reformism of the everyday was later transferred to the level of
work; arriving late for work, writes Ratgeb[^12] is the beginning of a
critique of wage labor. We are not seeking to make fun of Vaneigem,
unhappy theoretician of an art of living, "la radicalitÃ©". His brio only
succeeds in giving the Treatise an empty pretension which makes one
smile. The Real Split... is ill inspired to mock the attitude of
Vaneigem in May 1968, when he left for his vacation as planned even
though the "events" had begun (he quickly returned). This personal
contradiction reflected the theoretical and practical contradiction
sustained by the S.I. from its beginnings. Like every morality,
Vaneigem's position was untenable and had to explode on contact with
reality. The S.I. in denouncing his attitude gave itself over also to a
moralistic practice: it judged acts without examining their causes. This
revelation of Vaneigem's past, whether it troubles or amuses the
radicalists, has besides something unpleasant about it. If Vaneigem's
inconsistency in 1968 was important, the S.I. should have drawn
conclusions from it, as it did not fail to do in a host of other cases,
and should not have waited until four years later to talk about it. If
Vaneigem's default was not important, it was useless to talk about it,
even when he broke with the S.I.. In fact the S.I., to use its own
expression, exorcised the impotence of its morality by denouncing the
individuals who failed in upholding this morality, thus saving at one
blow both the morality and itself as the S.I.. Vaneigem was the
scapegoat for an impossible utopianism.

# Materialism and Idealism in the S.I.

Against militant moralism, the S.I. extolled another morality: that of
the autonomy of individuals in the social group and in the revolutionary
group. Now, only an activity integrated into a social movement permits
autonomy through an effective practice. Otherwise the requirement of
autonomy ends up by creating an elite of those who know how to make
themselves autonomous[^13]. Whoever says elitism also says
disciples. The S.I. showed a great organizational idealism, as did
Bordiga (the revolutionary as "disintoxicated"), even though the
S.I. resolved it differently. The S.I. had recourse to an immediate
practical morality, which illustrates its contradiction. Every morality
puts on top of the given social relations the obligation to behave in a
way which runs counter to those relations. In this case, the S.I.'s
morality requires that one be respectful of spontaneity.

The S.I.'s materialism is limited to the awareness of society as
intersubjectivity, as interaction of human relationships on the
immediate plane, neglecting the totality: but society is also the
production of its own material conditions, and the immediate relations
crystallize into institutions, with the state at their head. The
"creation of concrete situations" is only one facet of the revolutionary
movement. In theorizing it, the S.I. does indeed start out from the real
conditions of existence, but reduces them to intersubjective
relations. This is the point of view of the subject trying to rediscover
itself, not a view which encompasses both subject and object. It is the
"subject" stripped of its "representation". The systematization of this
opposition in The Society of the Spectacle takes up again the idealist
opposition characterized by its forgetting of Man's objectifications
(labor, appropriation of the world, fusion of Man and nature). The
subject-object opposition is the guiding thread of Western philosophy,
formed in a world whose meaning Man sees escaping him little by
little. Already Descartes was setting side by side the progress of
mathematics and the stagnation of metaphysics. Mercantile Man is in
search of his role.

The S.I. was not interested in production. It reproached Marx for being
too economistic, but did not itself make a critique of political
economy. Society is an ensemble of relations which assert themselves by
objectifying themselves, creating material or social objects
(institutions); the revolution destroys capitalism by a human action at
the level of its objectifications (system of production, classes, state)
carried out precisely by those who are at the center of these relations.

Debord is to Freud what Marx is to Hegel: he founds what is only a
materialist theory of personal relationships, a contradiction in
terms. Instead of starting from the ensemble of social relations, the
notion of the "construction of situations" isolates the relation between
subjects from the totality of relations. In the same way as, for Debord,
the spectacle says all there is to be said about capitalism, the
revolution appears as the construction of situations expanded to the
whole of society. The S.I. did not grasp the mediations on which society
rests; and foremost among these, labor, the "fundamental need" (William
Morris) of Man. As a consequence of this, it did not clearly discern the
mediations on the basis of which a revolution can be made. To get out of
the difficulty it exaggerated the mediation of the organization. Its
councilist, democratic and self-management-ist positions are explained
by its ignorance of the social dynamic.

The S.I. insisted on forms of organization to remedy the inadequacy of
the content which escaped it. Practicing "the inversion of the genitive"
like Marx in his early work, it put things back on their feet: inverting
the terms of ideology so as to understand the world in its reality. But
a real understanding would be more than an inversion: Marx was not
content to turn Hegel and the Young Hegelians upside down.

The S.I. only saw capital in the form of the commodity, ignoring the
cycle as a whole. Of Capital, Debord only retains the first sentence,
without understanding it: capital presents itself as an accumulation of
commodities, but it is more than that. The S.I. saw the revolution as a
calling into question more of the relations of distribution (c.f. the
Watts riot) than of the relations of production. It was acquainted with
the commodity but not with surplus value.

The S.I. showed that the communist revolution could not be only an
immediate attack on the commodity. This contribution is
decisive. Although the Italian Left had described communism as the
destruction of the market, and had already broken with the ideology of
the productive forces, it had not understood the formidable subversive
power of concretely communist measures[^14]. Bordiga, in fact, pushes
social communization back beyond a seizure of "political power". The
S.I. viewed the revolutionary process at the level of human
relations. Even the State cannot be destroyed strictly on the military
plane. The mediation of society, it is also (but not) solely destroyed
by the demolition of the capitalist social relations which uphold it.

The S.I. ended up with the opposite mistake to Bordiga's. The latter
reduced the revolution to the application of a program: the former
limited it to an overthrow of immediate relations. Neither Bordiga nor
the S.I. perceived the whole problem. The one conceived a totality
abstracted from its real measures and relations, the other a totality
without unity or determination hence an addition of particular points
extending itself little by little. Incapable of theoretically dominating
the whole process, they both had recourse to an organizational
palliative to ensure the unity of the process -- the party for Bordiga,
the councils for the S.I.. In practice, while Bordiga depersonalized the
revolutionary movements to the point of excess, the S.I. was an
affirmation of individuals to the point of elitism. Although it was
totally ignorant of Bordiga, the S.I. allows one to develop Bordiga's
thesis on the revolution further by means of a synthesis with its own.

The S.I. itself was not able to realize this synthesis, which
presupposes an all-round vision of what society is. It practised
positive utopianism only for the purpose of revelation, and that is
without doubt its theoretical stumbling block.

> What must happen... in the centers of unequally shared but vital
> experience is a demystification. (\#7, p. 48).

There was a society of "the spectacle", a society of "false
consciousness", as opposed to the supposedly classical capitalism of the
19th century: it was a matter of giving it a time consciousness of
itself. The S.I. never separated itself from Lukacsian idealism, as is
shown by the only critique of the S.I. which has appeared up to the
present: Supplement au no. 301 de la Nouvelle Gazette
Rhenane[^15]. Lukacs knew (with the help of Hegel and Marx) that
capitalism is the loss of unity, the dispersion of consciousness. But,
instead of concluding from this that the proletarians will recompose a
unitary world view by means of their subversive practice (concluding in
the revolution), he thought that consciousness must be reunified and
rediscovered first in order for this subversion to happen. As this is
impossible he too fled back into magic and theorized the need for a
concretization of consciousness which must be incarnated in an
organization before the revolution is possible. This organized
consciousness is the "party". One sees immediately that, for Lukacs, the
justification of the party is secondary: what is primary is the idealism
of consciousness, the primacy accorded to consciousness of which the
party is only the manifestation. What is essential in his theory is that
consciousness must be incarnated in an organization. The S.I. takes up
in an uncritical way Lukacs' theory of consciousness but replaces the
"party" with the S.I. on side and the councils on the other. For the
S.I., as for Lukacs, the difference between "class in itself" and "class
for itself" is that the latter possesses class consciousness. That this
consciousness would not be brought to it by a party, but would spring
spontaneously from the organization of the workers into councils is
quite secondary. The S.I. conceived of itself as an organization
destined to make the truth burst forth: it made revelation the principle
of its action. This explains the inordinate importance which the
S.I. saw in the tendency toward "total democracy" in 1968. Democracy is
the perfect place for consciousnesses to elucidate
themselves. Everything is summed up in the S.I.'s definition of a
proletarian as one who "has no control over the use of his life and who
knows it".

Art is today voluntary alienation; in it the systematic practice of
artifice renders more visible the facticity of life. Shutting itself in
its idea of the "spectacle", the S.I. remained a prisoner of its
origins. _The Society of the Spectacle_ is already a completed book. The
theory of appearances turns back on itself. Here one can even read the
beginnings of currently fashionable ideas about capital as
representation. Capital becomes image... the concentrated result of
social labor... becomes apparent and submits the whole of reality to
appearance.

The S.I. was born at the same moment as all the theses about
"communication" and language and in reaction against them, but it mostly
tended to pose the same problem in different terms. The S.I. was formed
as a critique of communication, and never departed from this point of
origin: the council realizes a "true" communication. In spite of this,
unlike Barthes and his ilk, the S.I. refused to let the sign turn back
on itself. It did not want to study apparent reality (the study of
"mythologies" or of the "superstructures" dear to Gramsci's heart) but
rather reality as appearance. Marx wrote in 1847:

> Human activity = commodity. The manifestation of life, active life,
> appears as a mere means: appearance, separate from this activity, is
> grasped as an end in itself.

The S.I. itself succumbed to fetishism in fixating itself on forms:
commodity, subject, organization, consciousness. But unlike those who
today repeat its ideas while conserving only the flashy parts and the
mistakes (utopia, etc.), the S.I. did not make it a rule to confuse
language with society. What was for the S.I. a contradiction became the
raison d'etre of modernism.

# No Theoretical Summing up

Nothing is easier than a false summing-up. One can even do it over, like
the famous self-criticism, every time one changes one's ideas. One
renounces the old system of thought so as to enter the new one, but one
does not change one's mode of being. The "theoretical summing-up" can be
in fact the most deceitful practice while appearing to be the most
honest. The Real Split... succeeds in not talking about the S.I. and its
end, except so as not to grapple with its conceptions -- in a word, it
talks about it non-theoretically. Denouncing (no doubt sincerely)
triumphalism and self-sufficiency in relation to the S.I. and in the
S.I. but without a theoretical critique, the book ends up presenting the
S.I. as a model. Debord and Sanguinetti don't get to the point except
with the pro-situs, who inspired them to some good reflections, but
still at the level of subjective relations, of attitudes. Theory is
always seen from the standpoint of attitudes which incarnate it; an
important dimension certainly, but not an exclusive one.

There is no self-analysis of the S.I.. The S.I. came, 1968 announces the
return of the revolution, now the S.I. is going to disappear so as to be
reborn everywhere. This lucid modesty masks two essential points: the
authors argue as though the SIs perspective had been totally correct;
they do not ask themselves whether there might not be a link between the
sterility of the S.I. after 1968 (c.f. the correspondence of the
Orientation Debate) and the insufficiency of that perspective. Even on
the subject of the pro-situs, Debord and Sanguinetti fail to establish
any logical relation between the S.I. and its disciples. The S.I. was
revolutionary with the aid of a theory based on attitudes (which would
later prove to be a brake on its evolution). After the phase of
revolutionary action, the pro-situ retained nothing but the
attitude. One cannot judge a master solely by his disciples: but he also
has, in part, disciples he has called forth. The S.I. accepted the role
of master involuntarily, through its very conceptions. It did not
directly propose a _savoir-vivre_, but in presenting its ideas as a
"savoir-vivre" it pushed an art of living on its readers. The Real
Split... registers the ideological use to which I.S. was put, its being
turned into a spectacle, says the book, by half the readers of the
journal. This was partly inevitable (see below on recuperation) but in
part also due to its own nature. Every radical theory or movement is
recuperated by its weaknesses: Marx, by his study of the economy
in-itself and his radical-reformist tendencies, the German Left by its
councilism, etc. Revolutionaries remain revolutionaries by profiting
from these recuperations, eliminating their limitations so as to advance
toward a more developed totalization. The Real Split... is also a split
in the minds of its authors. Their critique of Vaneigem is made as if
his ideas were foreign to the S.I.. To read Debord and Sanguinetti, one
would think that the S.I. had no responsibility for the _Traite_:
Vaneigem's weakness, one would think, belongs to him alone. One or the
other: either the S.I. did indeed take his faults into account -- in
which case why didn't it say something about them? -- or else it ignored
them. The S.I. here inaugurates a practice of organization (which _S ou
B_ would have qualified with the word "bureaucratic"): one does not
learn of the deviations of members until after their exclusion. The
organization retains its purity, the errors of its members do not affect
it. The trouble comes from the insufficiencies of the members, never
from on high, and not from the organization. As the eventual megalomania
of the leaders does not explain everything, one is obliged to see in
this behavior the sign of a mystified coming-to-consciousness of the
group's impasse, and of a magical way of solving it. Debord was the
S.I.. He dissolved it: this would have been proof of a lucid and honest
attitude if he had not at the same time eternized it. He dissolved the
S.I. so as to make it perfect, as little open to criticism as he was
little able to criticize it himself.

In the same way, his film _Society of the Spectacle_ is an excellent
means of eternizing his book. Immobilism goes side by side with the
absence of summing-up. Debord had learned nothing. The book was a
partial theorization: the film totalizes it. This sclerosis is even more
striking in what was added for the film's re-release in 1976. Debord
replies to a series of criticisms of the film, but says not a word about
various people (some of them very far removed from our own conceptions)
who judged the film severely from a revolutionary point of view. He
prefers to take on _Le Nouvel Observateur_[^16]. More and more, his
problem is to defend his past. He runs aground of necessity, because all
he can do is re-interpret it. The S.I. no longer belongs to him. The
revolutionary movement will assimilate it in spite of the situationists.

# An Exercise in Style

Otherwise serious, Sanguinetti's book Veridique Rapport[^17] is still a
mark of his failure (echec). We will not judge the book by its public,
which appreciates it as a good joke played on the bourgeoisie. These
readers are content to repeat that the capitalists are cretins, even
that they are contemptible compared to "real" ruling classes of the
past; if we wanted to, they say, we could be far bigger and better
bourgeois. Elitism and scorn for capitalism are derisory enough as
reactions, but reassuring when revolution does not appear any longer to
be an absolute certainty. But complacency in the denunciation of
bourgeois decadence is far from being subversive. It is shared by those
(like Sorel) who scorn the bourgeoisie while wanting to save
capitalism. The cultivation of this attitude is thus absurd in anyone
who has the slightest revolutionary pretensions. Let us admit in any
case that Sanguinetti scored a good shot.

The problem most commentators fail to deal with (and for good reason) is
to know whether he puts forward a revolutionary perspective. If he does
not he has only succeeded in letting off a firecracker within bourgeois
politics and the game of the parties. The proof of the pudding is in the
eating. His analysis of past events is false, and so is the
revolutionary perspective he proposes.

First of all, there was no "social war" in Italy in 1969 nor in Portugal
in 1976. May 1968 in France was the upsurge of a vast spontaneous
workers' organization: on the scale of a whole country, and in hundreds
of big enterprises, proletarians partook at the same moment of the
"proletarian experience", of confrontation with the state and the
unions, and understood in acts that working-class reformism only serves
capital. This experience will remain. It was an indispensable break, and
a lasting one even though the wound now seems to have been closed again.

But the S.I. took this break for the revolution itself. 1968 realized
for it what 1966 realized for _S ou B_: the practical verification of
its theory, in fact the confirmation of its limits and the beginning of
its getting tangled up. _La Veritable Scission_... asserts that the
occupation movement[^18] had situationist ideas: when one knows that
almost all the strikers left control of the strike to the unions, unless
one mythologizes the occupation movement, this shows only the limits of
situationist ideas. This ignorance of the state on the part of the
movement was not a supersession of jacobinism, but its corollary, as it
was in the Commune: the non-destruction of the state, its simple
democratization, went side by side in 1871 with an attempt by some
people to create a dictatorship on the model of 1793. It is true that
looking at 1871 or 1968 -- one would have to show the strength and not
the weakness of the communist movement, its existence rather than its
absence. Otherwise the revolutionary only develops a superior pessimism
and an abstract negation of everything which is not "the
revolution". But the revolutionary movement is such only if it
criticizes itself, insisting on the global perspective, on what was
missing in past proletarian movements. It does not valorize the past. It
is the state and the counterrevolution that take up the limits of past
movements and make their program out of them. Theoretical communism
criticizes previous experiences, but also distinguishes between
proletarian assault as in Germany in 1918-21, and attacks that were
immediately bogged down by capital as in 1871 and in Spain in 1936. It
is not content to describe positive movements, but also indicates the
ruptures which they had to effect in order to make the revolution. The
S.I. did the opposite. Moreover, starting in 1968, it theorized a rising
revolution. But above all it denied the question of the state.

> When the workers are able to assemble freely and without mediations to
> discuss their real problems, the state begins to dissolve. (The Real
> Split, p.33).

All of anarchism is there. Far from wanting, as one would expect, to
demolish the state, anarchism is most precisely characterized by its
indifference to it. Contrary to that "Marxism" which puts foremost and
above all else the necessity of "taking power", anarchism in fact
consists of a neglect of the question of state power. The revolution
unfolds, committees and assemblies form parallel to the state, which,
emptied of its power, collapses of its own accord. Founded on a
materialist conception of society, revolutionary marxism asserts that
capital is not only a soda, spread out thinly everywhere, but that it is
also concentrated in institutions (and first of all armed force) which
are endowed with a certain autonomy, and which never die by
themselves. The revolution only triumphs by bringing against them an
action at once generalized and concentrated. The military struggle is
based on the social transformation, but has its own specific role. The
S.I. for its part, gave way to anarchism, and exaggerated the importance
of workers' assemblies (in 1968, Pouvoir Ouvrier and the Groupe de
Liaison pour l'Action des Travailleurs were also preoccupied essentially
with calling for democratic workers' assemblies).

In the same way, to say that in Portugal the pressure of the workers
hindered the construction of the modern capitalist state, is to have
only the viewpoint of the state, of capital. Is capital's problem to
develop in Portugal, to constitute a new and powerful pole of
accumulation there? Wasn't the objective of the "revolution of the
carnations" to channel confused popular and proletarian aspirations
toward illusory reforms, so that the proletariat would remain quiescent?
Mission accomplished. It is not a matter of a half-victory for the
proletariat, but of an almost total defeat, in which the "proletarian
experience" was almost non-existent, because there was not, so to speak,
any direct confrontation, any alignment of proletarians around a
position opposed to capitalism. They never stopped supporting the
democratized state, even at times against the parties, which they
accused of "treason"[^19].

Neither in Italy in 1969, nor in Portugal in 1974-5, was there a "social
war". What is a social war if not a head-on struggle between classes,
calling into question the foundations of society -- wage labor,
exchange, the state? There was not even the beginning of a confrontation
between classes, and between the proletariat and the state in Italy and
Portugal. In 1969, the strike movements sometimes spread into riots but
not every riot is the beginning of the revolution. The conflicts born of
demands could become violent and could even provoke the beginning of a
struggle against the forces of Order. But the degree of violence does
not indicate the content of the struggle. In battling the police, the
workers continued to believe no less in a leftwing government. They
called for a "real democratic state" against the conservative forces
supposedly dominating it.

Explaining the failure of the "social war" by the presence of the C.P.s
is as serious as attributing everything to the absence of the
party. Should one ask whether the German revolution miscarried in 1919
because of the S.P.D. and the unions? Or should one rather ask why the
S.P.D. and the unions existed, why the workers continued to support
them? One must begin from inside the proletariat.

Certainly, it is comforting to see a book which presents the C.P. as one
of the pillars of capitalism undergo a wide distribution. But this
success is ambiguous. If capital no longer has any all-encompassing
thought, or even no thinkers at all (which is in any case incorrect),
the S.I. thinks well enough in its place, but badly for the proletariat,
as we shall see. Sanguinetti finishes by reasoning in capitalist
terms. In fact, he has constructed an analysis such as a capitalist who
had assimilated vulgar marxism would have. It is the bourgeoisie who
speak of revolution where there is none. For them, occupied factories
and barricades in the streets are the beginning of a
revolution. Revolutionary marxism does not take the appearance for
reality, the moment for the whole. The "heaviness" of marxism is
preferable to a lightness without content. But let us leave the readers
to choose according to what motivates their reading.

The S.I. has succeeded at an exercise in style: the final verdict for a
group that mocked the cult of style in a style-less world. It has come
in the end to play capitalist, in every sense of the word. Its
brilliance is unimpaired, but it has nothing else left but
brilliance. The S.I. gives good advice to capitalists and bad advice to
proletarians, to whom it proposes nothing but councilism.

Veridique rapport contains two ideas: (i) the governmental participation
of the C.P. is indispensable to Italian capitalism; (ii) the revolution
is the workers' councils. The second idea is false, the first one true;
capitalists like Agnelli have also expressed it. In a word, Sanguinetti
manages to grasp the totality as a bourgeois and nothing more.

He wanted to pass himself off as an enlightened bourgeois: he has
succeeded all too well. He has beaten himself at his own game.

# Recuperation

At the same moment, Jaime Semprun, the author of La Guerre sociale au
Portugal, published a Precis de recuperation. Here is what the S.I. once
said about "recuperation":

> It is quite normal that our enemies should come to use us
> partially... just like the proletariat, we do not pretend to be
> unexploitable under present conditions. (I.S. \#9. p. 4).

> The vital concepts undergo at one and the same time the truest and
> most lying uses... because the struggle of critical reality against
> apologetic spectacle leads us to a struggle over words, a struggle the
> more bitter as the words are more central. It is not an authoritarian
> purge, but the coherence of a concept's use in theory and in practical
> life which reveals its truth. (I.S. \#10, p. 82).

The counterrevolution does not take up revolutionary ideas because it is
malign or manipulative, let alone short of ideas, but because
revolutionary ideas deal with real problems with which the
counterrevolution is confronted. It is absurd to launch into a
denunciation of the enemy's use of revolutionary themes or
notions. Today, all terms, all concepts are perverted. The subversive
movement will only reappropriate them by its own practical and
theoretical development.

Since the end of the 19th century, capitalism and the workers' movement
have engendered a fringe of thinkers who take up revolutionary ideas
only so as to empty them of their subversive content and adapt them to
capital. The bourgeoisie has, by nature, a limited vision of the
world. It must call on the vision of the class, the proletariat, which
is the bearer of another project. This phenomenon has been amplified
since marxism has been officially recognized as having public
usefulness. During the first period, capital drew from it a sense of the
unity of all relations and of the importance of the economy (in the
sense in which Lukacs rightly said that capitalism produces a fragmented
vision of reality). But to the extent that capitalism comes to dominate
the whole of life, this vision -- broadly speaking, that of
old-fashioned economistic vulgar marxism -- is inadequate to its
complexity and to the extension of conflicts to all its levels. During
the second period, the one we are living in today, determinist orthodox
marxism has been rejected by the bourgeoisie itself. At the
universities, it was good fun to shrug one's shoulders at Capital fifty
years ago: around 1960, it became permissible to find "interesting
ideas" in it, the more so as they were being "applied" in the
U.S.S.R\.... To be in fashion today, it is enough to say that Capital is
in the rationalist and reductionist tradition of Western philosophy
since Descartes, or even since Aristotle. The new official marxism is
not an axis; instead one puts a little bit of it everywhere. It serves
to remind one of the "social" character of all practice: the
"recuperation" of the S.I. is only a particular case.

One of the natural channels of this evolution is the university, since
the apparatus of which it is a part backs a considerable part of the
research on the modernization of capital. Official "revolutionary"
thought is the scouting party of capital. Thousands of appointed
functionaries criticize capitalism from every direction.

Modernism expresses the social crisis of which the crisis of the
proletariat is only an aspect. Out of the limits which the subversive
movement encounters at every step, modernism makes its objectives. It
serves in particular to justify immediate reformism at the social
level. In fact, traditional working class reformism no longer needs
justification inasmuch as it has become the rule. The reformism of
customs and daily life still needs to be theorized, both against the
revolutionary movement from which issues the bias toward it, and against
backward capitalist fractions which reject liberties that are
nonetheless inoffensive to capital. Modernism thus gets developed
because it helps capital to free itself from the fetters on capitalist
liberty. The reformism of the everyday is still in its ascendant phase,
as economic and working class reformism was seventy years ago.

The common trait of all modernism is the taking up of revolutionary
theory by halves; basically its approach is that of "marxism" as against
Marx. Its axiom is to call, not for revolution, but for liberation from
a certain number of constraints. It wants the maximum of freedom within
the existing society. Its critique will always be that of the commodity
and not of capital, of politics and not of the state, of totalitarianism
and not of democracy. Is it by accident that its historical
representative, Marcuse, came from a Germany forced to turn away from
the radical aspirations revealed in 1917-21?

It is conceivable to denounce deformations in revolutionary theory in
order to make things absolutely precise -- on the condition, however,
that there is more than just a denunciation. In Semprun's book, there is
not an ounce of theory to be found. Let us take two examples. In his
critique of G. Guegan[^20], Semprun shows what he considers
important. Why demolish this personage? To demarcate oneself, even with
violent language, has no meaning unless one Puts oneself at a higher
level. Semprun spreads Guegan's life over several pages. But if it is
really necessary to talk about Guegan, there is something that must be
got straight concerning Cahiers du futur (Future Notebooks), the journal
he edited. If the first issue was uselessly pretentious, the second,
devoted to the counter-revolution, is particularly detestable. It
presents the fact that the counter-revolution feeds on the revolution as
a paradox, takes pleasure in pointing out the mix-up without explaining
anything, as something to revel in amid complacently morbid drawings,
and sends everybody into a tailspin. This (intentional ?) derision for
all revolutionary activity mixes in a little more and fosters a feeling
of superiority among those who have understood because they have been
there: "That's where revolution leads..." (read: "That's what I was when
I was a militant..." One can only dream of what the S.I. in its prime
might have written about this.

Semprun also shows how Castoriadis[^21] has innovated in taking it upon
himself to "recuperate" his own past revolutionary texts, striving to
make them unreadable by heaping them with prefaces and footnotes. This
is amusing at first sight, but becomes less so when one knows what the
S.I. owes to _S ou B_. Semprun even shows condescension toward
Chaulieu's "marxist" period. The ultra-left was indeed dry as dust, but
not enough to stop Debord from joining it. Whether one likes it or not,
this is falsification: one amuses the reader while making him forget
what the S.I.'s bankruptcy owes to Chaulieu before he went bankrupt
himself.

In these two cases as in others, individuals are judged by their
attitude, not by their theoretical evolution, from which one might
profit. Semprun presents us with a gallery of moral portraits. He does
not analyze, he judges. He pillories a number of assholes who stole from
the S.I.. Criticizing these attitudes, he is himself nothing but an
attitude.

Like every moralistic practice, this one leads to some
monstrosities. The most striking is the aggravation of the practice of
organization already mentioned in relation to The Real Split... As
Debord's new bodyguard, Semprun settles accounts with former members of
the S.I.. Reading these works, the uninitiated wouldn't think that the
S.I. was ever much of anything. Busy with his self-destruction, Debord
now unleashes a sectarianism which reveals his fear of the
world. Semprun's style can thus only insult everything that comes within
its scope and which is not Debord. He is nothing but a demarcation. He
does not know either how to approve or to scorn. Of radical criticism,
he has retained only the contempt.

# Spectacle

The S.I. always valued its trademark and did its own publicity. One of
its great weaknesses was wanting to appear to be without weaknesses,
without faults, as if it had developed the Superman within itself. Today
it is no more than that. As a critique of traditional groups and of
militantism, the S.I. played at being an International, turning politics
into derision. The rejection of the pseudo-serious militant who achieves
only the spirit of the cloister today serves to evade serious
problems. Voyer[^22] practices derision only to become derisory
himself. The proof that the S.I. is finished is that it continues in
this form. As a critique of the spectacle, the S.I. shows off its
bankruptcy by making a spectacle of itself, and ends up as the opposite
of what it was born for.

For this reason, the S.I. continues to be appreciated by a public in
desperate need of radicality of which it retains only the letter and the
tics. Born from a critique of art, the S.I. winds up being used (despite
and because of itself) as a work of literature. One takes pleasure in
reading the S.I. or its successors, or the classics which it
appreciated, as others take pleasure in listening to the Doors. In the
period when the S.I. was really searching and self-searching, when the
practice of derision clothed real theoretical and human progression,
when humor did not serve merely as a mask, the S.I.'s style was much
less fluid and facile than that of these current writings. The rich text
resists its author as well as its readers. The text which is nothing but
style flows smoothly.

The S.I. contributed to the revolutionary common good, and its
weaknesses also have become fodder for a public of monsters, who are
neither workers nor intellectuals, and who do nothing. Barren of
practice, of passion, and often of needs, they have nothing between them
but psychological problems. When people come together with out doing
anything, they have nothing in common but their subjectivity. The
S.I. is necessary to them; in its work, they read the ready-made
theoretical justification for their interest in these relations. The
S.I. gives them the impression that the essential reality resides in
immediate intersubjective relations, and that revolutionary action
consists in developing a radicality at this level, in particular in
escaping from wage labor, which coincides with their existence as
dÃ©classÃ©s The secret of this radicality consists of rejecting everything
that exists (including the revolutionary movement) so as to oppose to it
whatever seems farthest away from it (even if this has nothing
revolutionary about it). This pure opposition has nothing revolutionary
about it but the words. The life-style has its rules, which are just as
constricting as those of the "bourgeois" world. Most often, bourgeois
values are Inverted in apologetics for not working, for marginal
existence, for everything that seems to transgress. Leftism makes
apologetics for the proletariat as something positive in this society:
the pro-situs glorify themselves (as proletarians) as pure negation. As
for the ones who have some theoretical substance, their watchword is
always the "critique of the S.I.", a critique which is impossible for
them because it would be also the critique of their milieu.

The vigor of the S.I. was not in its theory but in a theoretical and
practical exigency which its theory only partially recovered, which it
helped to locate. The S.I. was the affirmation of the revolution. Its
rise coincided with a period when it was possible to think that there
would be a revolution soon. It was not equipped to survive past that
period. It was successful as the self-critique of a social stratum
incapable of making the revolution by itself, and which denounced this
stratum's own pretensions (as represented for example, by leftism which
wants workers to be led by "conscious" drop-outs from the middle class).

# Radical Subjectivity

The S.I. had in relation to classical revolutionary marxism (of which
Chaulieu was a good example) the same function, and the same limits, as
Feuerbach had in relation to Hegelianism. To escape from the oppressive
dialectic of alienation/ objectification, Feuerbach constructed an
anthropological vision which placed Man, and in particular love and the
senses, at the center of the world. To escape from the economism and
factory-fetishism (usinisme) of the ultra-left; the S.I. elaborated a
vision of which human relations were the center and which is consonant
with "reality", is materialist, if these relations are given their full
weight so that they include production, labor. Feuerbachian anthropology
prepared the way for theoretical communism such as Marx was able to
synthesize during his own time, via the transition of the 1844
Manuscripts. In the same way, the theory of "situations" has been
integrated into a vision of communism of which the S.I. was incapable
such as is shown today in Un monde sans argent^[23].

For the same reason, Debord read Marx in the light of Cardan,
considering the "mature" Marx to have been submerged in political
economy, which is false. Debord's vision of communism is narrow in
comparison to the whole problem. The S.I. did not see the human species
and its reconciliation with Nature. It was limited to a very Western,
industrial urban universe. It located automation wrongly. It spoke of
"dominating nature" which also bespeaks the influence of _S ou B_. When
it dealt with material conditions, in relation to the organization of
space, it was still a matter of "relations between people". _S ou B_ was
limited by the enterprise, the S.I. by subjectivity. It went as far as
it could, but on its original trajectory. Theoretical communism is more
than a revolutionary anthropology. The 1844 Manuscripts assimilate
Feuerbach's vision by putting Man back into the totality of his
relations.

The S.I. owed a great deal to the texts of the young Marx, but it failed
to see one of their important dimensions. While other communists
rejected political economy as a justification of capitalism, Marx
superseded it. The comprehension of the proletariat presupposes a
critique of political economy. The S.I. had much more in common with
Moses Hess and Wilhelm Weitling, with Feuerbach and Stirner, the
expression of a moment in the emergence of the proletariat. The period
which produced them (1830-48) greatly resembles the one in which we
live. Putting forward a radical subjectivity against a world of
commodity objects and reified relationships, the S.I. expressed an
exigency which was fundamental, yet had to be superseded. Becker, a
friend of Weitling's, wrote in 1844:

> We want to live, to enjoy, to understand everything... communism
> concerns itself with matter only so as to master it and subordinate it
> to the mind and spirit...

A large part of current discussions reproduces these pre-1848
debates. Like Invariance today, Feuerbach made humanity into a being
which permits the breaking of isolation:

> Isolation signifies a narrow and constricted life, while community, by
> contrast, signifies an infinite and free one.

Though he conceptualized the relation between Man and Nature
(reproaching Hegel for having neglected it), Feuerbach made the human
species into a being over and above social life: "The unity of I and
Thou is God." The 1844 Manuscripts gave the senses their place in human
activity. By contrast, Feuerbach made sensualism (sic) into the primary
problem:

> The new philosophy rests on the truth of feelings. In love, and in a
> more general way, in his feelings, every man affirms the truth of the
> new philosophy.

The theoretical renaissance around 1968 renewed the old concept within
the same limits. Stirner opposed the "will" of the individual to Hess's
moralism and Weitling's denunciation of "egoism", just as the
S.I. opposed revolutionary pleasure to militant self-sacrifice. The
insistence on subjectivity testifies to the fact that proletarians have
not yet succeeded in objectifying a revolutionary practice. When the
revolution remains at the stage of desire, it is tempting to make desire
into the pivot of the revolution.

[^1]: Translator's footnote: Invariance: journal published by a group which
	split from the International Communist Party, itself the most dogmatic
	and voluntarist by-product of the "Bordigist" Italian left. After several
	years of obscure, though occasionally brilliant theoretical involutions,
	Invariance's editor Jacques Camatte arrived at the position that capital
	has "escaped the law of value" and that therefore the proletariat has
	disappeared. For a presentation in English of his views, see The Wandering
	of Humanity published by Black and Red, Detroit.
[^2]: Translator's footnote : The term "sign" is used in structuralist writing
	to mean a signifier (representation) that has become separated from what
	it originally signified (a phenomenon in the world). A "sign" thus implies
	a representation which refers only to itself, i.e. is "tautological". One
	example of a "sign" would be the credit extended in ever greater quantities
	to bankrupt nations by large banks, credit which cannot possibly be repaid:
	it is a representation of commodities which will never be produced.)
[^3]: Translator's footnote: Joseph Dejacque: French communist artisan active
	in the 1848 rising. A collection of his writings is available under the
	title A Bas les chefs (Champ Libre, Paris 1974).
[^4]: Translator's footnote: The struggle over Radio Renascensa in Portugal
	during 1975 bears out this point.
[^5]: Translator's footnote: Appeared in English as The Totality for Kids.
[^6]: Translator's footnote: In a series of articles in Socialisme ou Barbarie,
	it was shown how capitalist industry needs the active and creative
	cooperation of workers in order to function. The most telling example of
	this is the British rank-and-file workers' tactic of the "work to rule"
	in which all jobs are carried out precisely according to union contract
	and employer specification. This usually results in a decline in output
	by anywhere up to 50 percent. (Tr.)
[^7]: Translator's footnote: This concept was central to the "unitary urbanism"
	of the early S.I.. Loosely translated it means drifting around, usually on
	foot, in a city, and exploring and analyzing the life of the city thereby. (Tr.)
[^8]: Translator's footnote: La veritable scission dans I'Internationale: Editions
	Champ Libre. Documents by various members of the S.I. concerning the splitting
	and dissolution of the group.
[^9]: Translator's footnote: Henri Lefebvre: at one time the most sophisticated
	philosophical apologist for the French CP (c.f. his Dialectical Materialism,
	Cape Editions, London). Lefebvre broke with the Party and during the late
	'50's and early '60s began to construct a "critical theory of everyday life".
	His work was important to the S.I. although he never transcended a
	fundamentally academic and sociologistic viewpoint. The S.I. denounced him
	after he published a text on the Paris Commune which was largely stolen from
	the S.I.'s earlier "Theses" on the same topic.
[^10]: Translator's footnote: Published in the U.S. as Decline and Fall of the
	Spectacular Commodity Economy.
[^11]: Translator's footnote: Internationalist Communist Party (founded in 1943).
	Their English journal is Communist Program.
[^12]: Translator's footnote: Ratgeb: pseudonym used by Vaneigem for his book,
	De la greve sauvage a l'autogestion generalisee Editions 10/18, Paris, 1973.
[^13]: Translator's footnote: This fetishism of "autonomy" developed into a nasty
	little game among the "pro-situ" groups. They would solicit "dialogue" from
	people who "saw themselves" in one of their texts. When naive sympathizers
	responded, they would be encouraged to engage in some "autonomous practice"
	so as to prove that they were not "mere spectators." The most sincere among
	them would then attempt this. The result would invariably be savagely
	denounced by the prositu group as "incoherent", "confusionist", etc. and
	relations would be broken off.
[^14]: Translator's footnote: Such as the subversive effect of the mass refusal
	to pay and the free distribution of goods and services carried out by the
	Italian "self-reduction" movement. Naturally, in a full-fledged revolutionary
	situation, this would go much further and would include the immediate
	communization of key means of production both to provide for the survival
	of the proletarian movement and to undermine the resource base of the
	remaining capitalist forces.
[^15]: Translator's footnote: Published in 1975. Distributed by Editions de
	I'Oubli, Paris.
[^16]: A left-wing intellectual French weekly.
[^17]: Translator's footnote: Veridique rapport sur les derniers chances de sauver
	le capitalisme en Italie.
[^18]: Translator's footnote: i.e. The movement of occupation of workplaces and
	campuses during May '68. [19]:Translator's footnote: The translator disagrees
	with this estimation; c.f. the account of the TAP strike in Portugal:
	Anti-Fascism or Anti-Capitalism, Root and Branch, 1976.
[^20]: Translator's footnote: Geugan was the manager and the real founder of
	Champ Libre Publications until he was fired in 1975. He is now a fashionable
	figure in literary and avant-garde circles.
[^21]: Translator's footnote: Cardan - Chaulieu's real name. (tr)
[^22]: Translator's footnote: Jean-Pierre Voyer, author of "Reich: How to Use"
	(available from Bureau of Public Secrets, P.O. Box 1044 Berkeley, Ca. 94701)
	and other texts published by Champ Libre. (tr.)
[^23]: Le communisme: un monde sans argent [Communism: A World without Money]
	(3 vols.) by Organization des jeunes Travailleurs Revolutionnaires. Paris, 1975.
