---
title: "The \"Renegade\" Kautsky and his Disciple Lenin"
author: Dauvé, Gilles
date: 1977
description: "Originally published as an afterword to Kautsky's Three Sources of Marxism, which is mentioned throughout. From <https://libcom.org/library/renegade-kautsky-disciple-lenin-dauve>, with some formatting fixes from <https://web.archive.org/web/20091019185622/https://www.geocities.com/~johngray/barrotk.htm>."
...

_The three sources of Marxism; the historic work of Marx_ is clearly of
historical interest. Kautsky was unquestionably the major thinker of the
Second International and his party, the German Social Democratic Party,
the most powerful. Kautsky, the guardian of _orthodoxy_, was almost
universally regarded as the most knowledgeable _expert_ on the work of
Marx and Engels and their privileged interpreter. Kautsky's positions
therefore bear witness to a whole era of the working class movement and
are worth knowing if only for this. We are concerned here with a central
question for the proletarian movement: the relationship between the
working class and revolutionary theory. Kautsky's reply to this question
formed the theoretical foundation of the practice and organisation of
all the parties which made up the Second International. This included
the Russian Social Democratic Party, and its Bolshevik fraction, which
was an orthodox member until 1914, that is until the collapse of the
International in the face of the First World War.

However, the theory expounded by Kautsky in that text did not collapse
at the same time as the Second International. Quite the contrary, it
survived and equally formed the basis of the Third International through
the medium of "Leninism" and its Stalinist and Trotskyist avatars.

# Leninism, by-product of Kautskyism!

Leninism, by-product of Kautskyism! This will startle those who only
know Kautsky from the abuse hurled at him by Bolshevism, and in
particular Lenin's pamphlet, _The Bankruptcy of the Second International
and the Renegade Kautsky_ (_La faillite de la III Internationale et le
renégat Kautsky_), and those who only know about Lenin what is
considered good to know about him in the various churches and chapels
they frequent.

Yet the very title of Lenin's pamphlet very precisely defines his
relationship with Kautsky. If Lenin calls Kautsky a renegade it's clear
that he thinks Kautsky was previously a follower of the _true faith_, of
which he now considers himself the only qualified defender. Far from
criticising Kautskyism, which he shows himself unable to identify, Lenin
is in fact content to reproach his former master-thinker for having
betrayed his own teachings. From any point of view Lenin's break was at
once late and superficial. Late because Lenin had entertained the
deepest illusions about German Social Democracy, and had only understood
after the _betrayal_ was accomplished. Superficial because Lenin was
content to break on the problems of imperialism and the war without
going into the underlying causes of the social democratic betrayal of
August 1914. These causes were linked to the very nature of those
parties and their relations, with capitalist society as much as with the
proletariat. These relations must themselves be brought back to the very
movement of capital and of the working class. They must be understood as
a phase of the development of the proletariat, and not as something open
to being changed by the will of a minority, not even of a revolutionary
leadership, however aware it might be.

From this stems the present importance of the theory which Kautsky
develops in a particularly coherent form in his pamphlet and which
constituted the very fabric of his thought throughout his life. Lenin
took up this theory and developed it as early as 1900 in _The Immediate
Objectives of our Organisation_ (_Les objectifs immédiats de notre
mouvement_) and then in _What Is To Be Done?_ in 1902, in which moreover
he quotes Kautsky at length and with great praise. In 1913 Lenin again
took up these ideas in _The Three Sources and the Three Component Parts
of Marxism_ in which he develops the same themes and sometimes uses
Kautsky's text word for word.

These ideas rest on a scanty and superficial historical analysis of the
relationships of Marx and Engels, to the intellectuals of their time as
much as to the working class movement. They can be summarised in a few
words, and a couple of quotations will be enough to reveal their
substance:

> A working class movement that is spontaneous and bereft of any theory
> rising in the labouring classes against _ascendant_ capitalism, is
> incapable of accomplishing... revolutionary work.

It is also necessary to bring about what Kautsky calls _the union of the
working class movement and socialism_.

Now: "Socialist consciousness today (?!) can only arise on the basis of
deep scientific knowledge... But the bearer of science is not the
proletariat but the bourgeois intellectuals;... so then socialist
consciousness is something brought into the class struggle of the
proletariat from outside and not something that arises spontaneously
within it." These words of Kautsky's are according to Lenin "profoundly
true."

It is clear that this much desired union of the working class movement
and socialism could not be brought about in the same way in Germany as
in Russia as the conditions were different. But it is important to see
that the deep divergence's of Bolshevism in the organisational field did
not result from different basic conceptions, but rather solely from the
application of the _same principles_ in different social, economic and
political situations.

In fact far from ending up in an ever greater union of the working class
movement and socialism, social democracy would end up in an ever closer
union with capital and the bourgeoisie. As for Bolshevism, after having
been like a fish in water in the Russian Revolution ("revolutionaries
are in the revolution like water in water") because of the revolution's
defeat it would end in all but complete fusion with state capital,
administered by a totalitarian bureaucracy.

However Leninism continues to haunt the minds of many revolutionaries of
more or less good will who are searching for a recipe capable of
success. Persuaded that they are "of the vanguard" because they possess
"consciousness", whereas they only possess a false theory, they struggle
militantly for a union of those two metaphysical monstrosities, "a
spontaneous working class movement, bereft of any theory" and a
disembodied "socialist consciousness."

This attitude is simply voluntarist. Now, if as Lenin said "irony and
patience are the principal qualities of the revolutionary", "impatience
is the principal source of opportunism (Trotsky)". The intellectual, the
revolutionary theorist doesn't have to worry about linking up with the
masses because if their theory is revolutionary they are already linked
to the masses. They don't have to chose the "camp of the proletariat"
(it is not Sartre using these terms, it is Lenin) because, properly
speaking, they do not have the choice. The _theoretical and practical_
criticism they bear is determined by the relationship they hold with
society. They can only _free themselves from this passion by
surrendering to it_ (Marx). If they "have the choice" it's because they
are no longer revolutionary, and their theoretical criticism is already
rotten. The problem of the penetration of revolutionary ideas which
_they share_ in the working class milieu is entirely transformed through
that milieu... when the historical conditions, the balance of power
between the warring classes, (principally determined by the autonomised
movement of capital) prevents any revolutionary eruption of the
proletariat onto the scene of history the intellectual does the same as
the worker: what they can. They study, write, make their works known as
best as they can, usually quite badly. When he was studying at the
British museum, Marx, a product of the historical movement of the
proletariat, was linked, if not to the workers, at least to the
historical movement of the proletariat. He was no more isolated from the
workers than any worker is isolated from the rest. To an extent the
conditions of the time limit such relationships to those which
capitalism allows.

On the other hand when proletarians form themselves as a class and in
one way or another declare war on capital they have no need whatsoever
for anyone to bring them KNOWLEDGE before they can do this. Being
themselves, in capitalist production relations, nothing but variable
capital, it is enough that they want to change their situation in
however small a way for them to be directly at the heart of the problem
which the intellectual will have some difficulty in reaching. In the
class struggle the revolutionary is neither more nor less linked to the
proletariat than they were before. But theoretical critique then fuses
with practical critique, not because it has been brought in from outside
but because they are one and the same thing.

If in recent times the weakness of the intellectual has been to believe
that proletarians remain passive because they lack "consciousness"; and
if they have come to believe themselves to be "the vanguard" to the
point of wanting to lead the proletariat, then they have some bitter
disappointments in store.

Yet it is this idea which constitutes the essence of Leninism, as is
shown by the ambiguous history of Bolshevism. These ideas were in the
end only able to survive because the Russian revolution failed, that is
to say because the balance of power, on the international scale, between
capital and proletariat, did not allow the latter to carry through its
practical and theoretical critique.

# The True Role of Bolshevism

This is what we shall try to demonstrate by analysing, in summary, what
happened in Russia and the true role of Bolshevism. In thinking that he
saw in Russian revolutionary circles the fruit of "the union of the
working class movement and socialism" Lenin was seriously mistaken. The
revolutionaries organised in social-democratic groups did not bring any
"consciousness" to the proletariat. Of course an exposition or a
theoretical article on Marxism was very useful to the workers: its use
however was not to give consciousness or the idea of class struggle, but
simply to clarify things and provoke further thought. Lenin did not
understand this reality. He not only wanted to bring to the working
class consciousness of the necessity of socialism in general, he also
wanted to give them imperative watchwords explaining what they must do
at a specific time. And this was quite normal since Lenin's party alone
(as the trustee of class consciousness) was fit to discern the general
interest of the working class beyond all its divisions into various
strata, to analyse the situation at all times and to formulate
appropriate watchwords. Well, the 1905 revolution would have to show the
practical inability of the Bolshevik party to direct the working class
and reveal the "behindness" of the vanguard party. All historians,
even those favourable to the Bolsheviks, recognised that in 1905 the
Bolshevik party understood nothing about the Soviets. The appearance of
new forms of organisation aroused the distrust of the Bolsheviks: Lenin
stated that the Soviets were "neither a working class parliament nor an
organ of self-government". The important thing is to see that the
Russian workers _did not know that_ they were going to form Soviets.
Only a very small minority amongst them knew about the experience of the
Paris commune and yet they created an embryonic worker's state, though
no-one had _educated them_. The Kautskyist-Leninist thesis in fact
denies the working class all power of original creation when not guided
by the party, (as the fusion of the working class movement and
socialism). Now you can see that in 1905, to take up a phrase from
_Theses on Feuerbach_, "the educator himself needs educating".

Yet Lenin did accomplish revolutionary work (his position on the war
amongst others) as opposed to Kautsky. But in reality _Lenin was only
revolutionary when he went against his theory of class consciousness_.
Let's take the case of his activity between February and October 1917.
Lenin had worked for more than 15 years (since 1900) to create a
vanguard organisation which would realise the union of "socialism" and
the "working class movement". He sought to regroup "political leaders"
(the "representatives of the vanguard capable of organising and leading
the movement".) In 1917, as in 1905, this political leadership,
represented by the central committee of the Bolshevik party, showed
itself beneath the tasks of the day, and _behind the revolutionary
activity of the proletariat_. All historians, including the Stalinist
and Trotskyist ones, show that Lenin had to fight a long and difficult
battle against the current in his own organisation to make his ideas
triumph. And he was only able to succeed by leaning on the workers of
the party, on the true vanguard organised in the factories inside or
around social-democratic circles. It will be said that all this would
have been impossible without the activity put in over many years by the
Bolsheviks, as much on the level of workers' everyday struggles as on
that of the defence and propagation of revolutionary ideas. The great
majority of the Bolsheviks, with Lenin in the foreground, did indeed
contribute through their unceasing propaganda and agitation to the
insurrection of October 1917. As revolutionary militants, they played an
effective role: but as the "leadership of the class" or the
"conscious vanguard", they were _behind the proletariat_. The
revolution took place against the ideas of _What Is To Be Done?_ and to
the extent that these ideas were applied (created by an organ directing
the working class but separated from it) they showed themselves to be _a
check and obstacle to the revolution_. In 1905 Lenin was behind history
because he clung to the ideas of _What Is To Be Done?_ In 1917 Lenin
took part in the real movement of the Russian masses and in doing this
rejected in his practice the concepts developed in _What Is To Be Done?_

If we apply to Kautsky and Lenin the opposite treatment to that which
they subjected Marx to, if we link their ideas to the class struggle
instead of separating them from it, Kautskyism-Leninism emerges as
characteristic of a whole period of the working class movement dominated
from the start by the Second International. Having developed and
organised as best they could, proletarians found themselves in a
contradictory situation from the end of the 19th century. They possessed
various organisations whose goal was to make the revolution and at the
same time they were incapable of carrying it through because the
conditions were not yet ripe. Kautskyism-Leninism was the expression of
the solution of this contradiction. By postulating that the proletariat
had to go through the detour of scientific consciousness in order to
become revolutionary, it authorised the existence of organisations to
enclose, direct and control the proletariat.

As we pointed out, Lenin's case is more complex than Kautsky's, to the
extent that Lenin was in one part of his life, a revolutionary as
opposed to Kautskyism-Leninism. Moreover, the situation of Russia was
totally different to that of Germany, which virtually possessed a
bourgeois-democratic regime and in which a working class movement
existed which was strongly developed and integrated into the system. It
was quite the opposite in Russia, where everything was still to be built
and there was no question of taking part in bourgeois parliamentary and
reformist union activities as these didn't exist. In these conditions
Lenin was able to adopt a revolutionary position despite his Kautskyist
ideas. We must nevertheless point out that he considered German
social-democracy a model until the world war.

In their revised and corrected histories of Leninism, the Stalinists and
Trotskyists show us a clear-sighted Lenin who understood and denounced
the "betrayal" by social democracy and the International before 1914.
This is _pure myth_ and one would really have to study the true history
of the International to show that not only did Lenin not denounce it but
that before the war he understood nothing of the phenomenon of social
democratic degeneracy. Before 1914 Lenin even praised the German
Social-Democratic party (SPD) for having been able to unite the "working
class movement" and "socialism" (cf. _What Is To Be Done?_). Let us just
quote these lines taken from the obituary article "August Bebel" (which
also contains several errors of detail and of substance concerning this
model "working class leader", and concerning the history of the Second
International).

> The basis of the parliamentary tactics of German (and international)
> Social-democracy, which doesn't give an inch to the enemy, which doesn't
> miss the slightest opportunity to obtain some improvement, however
> small, for the workers, which at the same time shows itself
> uncompromising on its principles and always aims towards achieving its
> objectives, the basis of these tactics was established by Bebel...

Lenin addressed these words of praise to "the parliamentary tactics of
German (and international) Social Democracy", "uncompromising its
principles"(!) in August 1913! A year later he thought that the issue
of _Vorwärts_ (paper of the German Social-Democratic Party) which
announced the vote for war credits by the Social-Democratic deputies,
was a fake manufactured by the German High Command. This reveals the
depth of the illusions he had held for a long time, in fact since
1900-1902, since _What Is To Be Done?_, in the Second International in
general and German social-democracy in particular. (We won't examine the
attitude of other revolutionaries, Rosa Luxemburg for example, to these
questions. That question would require a detailed study in its own
right.)

We have seen how Lenin had in his practice abandoned the ideas of _What
Is To Be Done?_ in 1917. But the immaturity of the class struggle on a
global level and in particular the absence of revolution in Europe,
brought the defeat of the Russian Revolution. The Bolsheviks found
themselves in power with the task of "governing Russia (Lenin)", of
performing the task of the bourgeois revolution which hadn't occurred,
that is to say, of actually securing the development of the Russian
economy. This development could not be anything but capitalist. The
bringing to heel of the working class -- and of opposition in the party
-- became an essential objective. Lenin, who had not explicitly rejected
_What Is To Be Done?_ in 1917, immediately took up again the "Leninist"
concepts which alone would allow the "necessary" enclosure of the
working class. The Democratic Centralists, the Workers' Opposition, and
the Workers' Group were crushed for having denied the "leading role of
the party". The Leninist theory of the party was likewise imposed on
the "International". After Lenin's death, Zinoviev, Stalin and so many
others would have to develop it whilst insisting ever more strongly on
"iron discipline" and "unity of thought and unity of action". The
principle on which the Stalinist International rested was the same as
that which formed the basis of the reformist socialist parties (the
party separate from the workers, bringing them consciousness of
themselves), whoever rejected the Lenino-Stalinist theory fell into
"the morass of opportunism, social-democracy and Menshevism".

# What Is To Be Done?

For their part, the Trotskyists clung to Lenin's ideas and recited _What
Is To Be Done?_ Humanity's crisis is nothing but _the crisis of
leadership_, said Trotsky: so a leadership must be created at any cost.
This is the ultimate idealism, the history of the world is explained as
a crisis of consciousness.

In the end, Stalinism would only triumph in countries where the
development of capitalism could not be assured by the bourgeoisie unless
conditions were created for the working class to destroy it. In Eastern
Europe, China and Cuba, a new leading group was formed, composed of the
high ranks of a bureaucratised working class movement, along with former
bourgeois specialists or technicians, sometimes army cadres or former
students who rallied to the new social order as in China. In the final
analysis, such a process was only possible because of the weakness of
the working class movement. In China for example the revolution's
driving social stratum was the peasantry: incapable of directing it
themselves, they could only be directed by "the party". Before the
seizure of power the group organised in "the party" directs the masses
and the "liberated zones" if there are any. Afterwards it takes in
hand the totality of the country's social life. Everywhere Lenin's ideas
have been a powerful bureaucratic factor. For Lenin the function of
directing the working class movement was _a specific function taken care
of by "leaders" organised separately from the movement and with that as
their_ role. To the extent that it sanctioned the establishment of a
corps separated from revolution, professionals leading the masses,
Leninism served as an _ideological justification_ for the formation of
leaderships separated from the workers. At this stage Leninism, taken
out of its original context, is no more than a technique for enclosing
the masses and an _ideology_ justifying bureaucracy and maintaining
capitalism: its recuperation was a historical necessity for the
development of those new social structures which themselves represent a
historical necessity for the development of capital. As capitalism
expands and dominates the entire planet, so the conditions which make
revolution possible become ripe. Leninist ideology is beginning to have
had its day.

It's impossible to examine the problem of the party without putting it
in the context of the historical conditions in which the debate
originated: in every case, though in different forms, the development of
Leninist ideology was due to the impossibility of proletarian
revolution. If history has sided with Kautskyism-Leninism, if its
opponents have never been able either to organise themselves in a
lasting way or even to put forward a coherent critique of it this is not
by chance: the success of Kautskyism-Leninism is a product of our era
and the first serious attacks -- practical attacks -- on it mark the end
of an entire period of history. For this to happen it was necessary for
the capitalist mode of production to fully develop over the whole world.
The 1956 Hungarian revolution sounded the death knell of a whole period:
of counter revolution, but also of revolutionary flowering. No-one knows
when this period will be _definitively obsolete_ but it is certain that
the critique of the ideas of Kautsky and Lenin, products of that period,
becomes possible and necessary from that time. That's why we recommend
reading Kautsky's _The Three Sources of Marxism, the Historic Work of
Marx_ so that the dominant ideology of a whole era is more widely known
and understood. Far from wanting to conceal the ideas which we condemn
and oppose, we want to spread them widely so as to show both their
necessity and their historical limits.

The conditions which allowed the development and success of
organisations of a social democratic or Bolshevik kind are today
obsolete. As for Leninist ideology, besides its use by bureaucrats in
power, far from being of use to revolutionary groups who crave the union
of socialism with the working class movement it can from now on only
serve to temporarily cement the union of passably revolutionary workers
with mediocre intellectuals.
