---
title: Notes on Trotsky, Pannekoek, Bordiga
author: Dauvé, Gilles
date: 1973
description: Apparently first published in English in _Eclipse and Re-emergence of the Communist Movement_, 1974, which Dauvé co-wrote under the name Jean Barrot. Sourced from <https://libcom.org/library/notes-trotsky-pannekoek-bordiga-gilles-dauv%C3%A9>.
...

It may be interesting to examine these three men, not as individuals,
but as standpoints, because in the eyes of many people who try to
understand something in our time, they represent three different
situations and analyses.

## I

If one goes back to Trotsky's quarrel with Lenin in 1903-4 and in the
following years, in the "Menshevik" period of his life, one must admit
that he rightly saw the flaw in the Kautsky-Lenin view that "class
consciousness" arises outside the workers' movement, and is then
introduced into it by the "party." This is explained in _Our Political
Tasks_, although it is considerably blurred by many other ideas. Trotsky
refutes Lenin's conception from a democratic point of view: he does not
see communism as the abolition of the commodity economy and the creation
of a new world, but as the rule of the workers over society. Therefore
he attacks Lenin for substituting the party for the proletariat. But
Lenin's theory must be refuted from another angle: Lenin fails to grasp
what Marx had tried to show. Transformed into a commodity, having all
aspects of its life turned into commodities, the proletariat, when
capital forces it to revolt (for instance, after a crisis), cannot avoid
destroying the market economy and all its consequences on labour,
personal relations, affective life, use of space and nature,
representation, etc. Lenin, like all the militants of the Second
International, failed to see that the communist program was _within_ the
proletariat. More generally, these people ignored the dynamics of
capital, and what communism really is. All the contributions to the
breakdown controversy (Luxemburg, Hilferding, etc.), most of which had a
purely economic conception, saw the problem from the point of view of
capital: why it could not work, and not from the point of view of the
proletariat: how the revolt of the workers led to new social relations.
This is not to say that communism only emerges out of the action of the
workers. On the contrary, the workers only attack capital if it attacks
them because of its inner problems (fall of the rate of profit, etc.).
But it is not enough to understand economic crises; one also has to
understand what they imply for the proletariat.

This was not understood at that time, owing to the overall stability and
prosperity. But it led revolutionaries to make a series of mistakes. One
of them was to misunderstand the workers' movement, which at that time
could only be reformist, and also the social-democratic movement, which
could only be evolutionary (with few exceptions). Only the collapse of
the International in 1914 really taught them what social-democratic
parties really stood for.

Trotsky's conception of the permanent revolution in Russia can only be
studied in this context. He thought that, after the democratic
revolution (which could only be made by the workers and peasants, as the
bourgeoisie was too weak: Lenin agreed about that), the workers could
not avoid going further, and would quickly take power for themselves --
with the support of the small peasants -- to introduce socialism. This
is where Lenin did not agree. Now it is obvious that communism -- as
Marx and communist theory define it -- was impossible at that stage in
Russia, because of the huge pre-capitalist sector. Trotsky did not care
about that, because to him socialism was equivalent to workers' power.
This is what I mean about his democratic conception of the revolution.
However, communism is a _transformation_ of social life, not just its
management by the masses.

Despite, or rather because of this conception, Trotsky was able to play
a much larger role in the 1905 revolution (because he was much closer to
the workers) than Lenin, whose centralist and rigid position in the 1903
split had alienated him from many active workers. Lenin also did not
trust spontaneous movements. It is even possible that the 1905 events
helped him modify his own position and become more efficient in the
period from 1906 to 1914.

During the war, Trotsky's internationalism, like Luxemburg's, was not as
radical, as the position Lenin expressed with his slogan: transform the
imperialist war into a civil war.

After he joined the Bolsheviks, Trotsky clearly showed that he hardly
understood what was going on. He had formerly identified socialism with
workers' power; he now identified workers' power with party power. From
this he concluded that Russia was building socialism. In _Communism and
Terrorism_ he stated that the duty of the worker was to obey the
(workers') State and that socialism meant discipline and high
productivity of labour. Lenin acted the same way, but he was at least
aware of the notion of communism. He more or less realised that Russia
was not socialist and could only be socialist with the help of Europe.

One must be very accurate on this question. Trotsky actually believed
that capitalism _could_ be avoided in Russia, even with no revolution in
Europe. It is true that he did not go so far as to believe that Russia
was completely socialist. This is why he had to invent the notion of an
intermediate stage, neither capitalist nor socialist, and a fantastic
theory of Bonapartism.

Trotsky took a very active part in the suppression of all opposition
which had some communist content. His own opposition was opportunistic
(alliance with Zinoviev in 1926) and he was afraid of becoming a threat
to the State. He organised his own defeat. How many people know that in
1925-6 he refrained from all political activity for about a year and a
half? There is no need to insist on this.

On the international level, he proved unable to understand the real
efforts of communist minorities and he supported the Communist
International in all its mistakes (activity within unions and
parliament, "mass" parties, slogan of workers' government, etc.). After
he was expelled from Russia, he was totally unable to establish any sort
of useful contact with revolutionary groups. He refused to question the
validity of the notorious "first four congresses of the Communist
International." He was both a sectarian and an opportunist. He had an
altogether administrative view of revolution. In France, for instance,
he supported people who had neither proletarian ties nor revolutionary
abilities, but were left-wing intellectuals. A list of all his political
blunders would be amazing. Looking for a mass following, he urged his
supporters to join socialist parties. He founded an International which
had a program but no proletariat. He was always looking for a new magic
device with which to go to the masses, and always failed.

In fact he had no program. He must be regarded as an active militant,
full of activity and ability, lacking a communist theoretical
background. He was excellent in the midst of a rising movement, as in
1905, but he went completely wrong in a declining movement. Then he
could become the worst bureaucrat if he was in power, or a troublemaker
if he had no power. It is doubtful that he ever had a theory of his own,
except for the theory of permanent revolution -- and we do not know
exactly what role Parvus played in the creation of this theory.

Trotsky only became an important figure as a symbol of the Russian
revolution. After the defeat of the revolutionary movement, he remained
important only because of the weakness of the communist minority.

## II

Pannekoek (1873-1960) is not very well known in the West. A few years
ago only a handful of militants or scholars had heard of him. His ideas
and his past are coming back to life only because the present period is
re-creating the conditions of his time -- but with major differences
which force us to correct his views.

Pannekoek was Dutch but most of his activity took place in Germany. He
was one of the few socialists in the developed countries who kept alive
the pre-1914 revolutionary tradition. But he only came to radical
positions during and after the war. His 1920 text _World Revolution and
Communist Tactics_ is one of the best works of that period. Pannekoek
saw that the failure of the Second International was not due to the
failure of its strategy, but that the strategy was itself rooted in the
function and the form of the Second International. The International was
adapted to a precise stage of capitalism, in which workers asked for
economic and political reforms. To make the revolution, the proletariat
had to build organs of a new type, which would go beyond the old
party/union dichotomy. On this he could not avoid a clash with the
Communist International. First, because the Russians had never fully
understood what the old International had been, and believed in
organising the workers from above, without seeing the connection between
Kautsky's "socialist consciousness" introduced into the masses, and
Kautsky's counter-revolutionary stand; secondly, because the Russian
State wished to have mass parties in Europe, capable of putting pressure
on their governments to come to terms with Russia. What Pannekoek stood
for was the real communist element in Germany. Soon it was defeated and
various large Communist Parties appeared in the West. The communist left
was reduced to small groups divided into different factions.

During the early 30's, Pannekoek and others tried to define communism.
They had already, as early as the beginning of the 1920's, denounced
Russia as capitalist. Now they went back to Marx's analysis of value.
They stated that capitalism is production for value accumulation,
whereas communism is production for use value, for the fulfilment of
people's needs. But there has to be some planning: without the mediation
of money, society will have to organise an accurate system of
bookkeeping, in order to keep track of the amount of labour-time
contained in every produced good. Precise accounting will see to it that
nothing is wasted. Pannekoek and his friends were quite right to go back
to value and its implications. But they were wrong to look for a
rational accounting system in labour-time. What they propose is in fact
the rule of value (since value is nothing but the amount of social
labour-time necessary to produce a good) without the intervention of
money. One may add that this was attacked by Marx in 1857, at the
beginning of the _Grundrisse_. But the German (and Dutch) left
communists did at least emphasise the heart of communist theory.

In the German civil war, from 1919 to 1923, the most active workers had
created new forms of organisation, mainly what they called
"unions,"[^01] or sometimes "councils," though the majority of the
workers' councils that existed were reformist. Pannekoek developed the
idea that these forms were important, in fact vital to the movement, as
opposed to the traditional party form. It was on this point that council
communism attacked party communism. Pannekoek went on to develop this
aspect more fully, until after the second world war he published
_Workers' Councils_, which elaborates a purely councilist ideology.
Revolution becomes a democratic process decided and controlled by the
workers all the way through. Socialism is reduced to workers'
management. As for the revolutionaries, they only have to correspond,
set forth theory, circulate information, and describe what the workers
are doing. But they must not organise in a permanent political group,
try to define a strategy, or act accordingly, lest they become the new
leaders of the workers and later the new ruling class. I tried to show
how wrong this is in the chapter "Leninism and the Ultra-Left," first
published in 1969 as a pamphlet.

From the analysis of Russia as State-capitalist, Pannekoek turned to the
analysis of those who, in western countries, act as the representatives
of the workers _within_ capitalism, first of all the unions.

Pannekoek was familiar with the direct forms of resistance of the
proletariat against capital, and he understood the triumph of
counter-revolution. But he misunderstood the general context of the
communist movement: its basis (transformation of the worker into a
commodity), its fight (centralised action against the State and the
existing workers' movement), its objective (creation of new social
relations where there is _no economy_ as such). He played an important
role in the reformation of the revolutionary movement. We have to see
the limits of his contribution, and then integrate it into a general
re-formulation of subversive theory.

## III

Bordiga (1889-1970) lived in a different situation. Like Pannekoek, who
had fought against reformism before the war and even left the Dutch
socialist party to create a new one, Bordiga belonged to the left of his
party. But he did not go as far as Pannekoek. At the time of the first
world war, the Italian party had a somewhat radical outlook, and there
was no possibility of a split. The party even opposed the war, though in
a more or less passive way.

When the Italian C.P. was founded in 1921, it broke with the right of
the old party, and also with its centre. This fact displeased the
Communist International. Bordiga led the party. He refused to take part
in elections, not as a matter of principle but of tactics. Parliamentary
activity can be used sometimes, but never when the bourgeoisie may use
it to divert the workers from the class struggle. Later Bordiga wrote
that he was not opposed to using the parliament as a tribune when this
was possible. For instance, at the beginning of fascism, it made sense
to try to use it as a tribune. But in 1919, in the midst of a
revolutionary movement, when insurrection and its preparation were the
order of the day, taking part in elections meant reinforcing bourgeois
lies and misconceptions about the possibility of change through
parliament. This was an important issue for Bordiga, whose group in the
socialist party had been called the "abstentionist faction." The
Communist International disagreed with this. Considering it a matter of
tactics and not of strategy, Bordiga decided to obey the C.I., because
he thought discipline was necessary in such a movement. But he kept his
position.

The united front tactics were another bone of contention. It seemed to
Bordiga that the very fact of inviting the socialist parties to common
action would create confusion among the masses, and hide the
irreconcilable opposition of these counter-revolutionary parties to
communism. It would also help some communist parties which had not
really broken with reformism to develop opportunistic tendencies.

Bordiga opposed the slogan of workers' government, which merely created
confusion in theory and in practice. To him, the dictatorship of the
proletariat was a necessary part of the revolutionary program. Today we
can see that he was right on these two issues. However, unlike
Pannekoek, he refused to explain these positions in terms of the
degeneration of the Russian State and party. He felt that the C.I. was
wrong, but that it was still communist.

Unlike the Communist International, Bordiga adopted a clear stand on
fascism. He not only regarded fascism as another form of bourgeois rule,
like democracy; he also believed one could not choose between them. This
issue has been debated frequently. The Italian left's position is
usually distorted. Historians often considered Bordiga responsible for
Mussolini's rise to power. He is even accused of being unconcerned by
the suffering of the people under fascism. In Bordiga's view, it is not
true that fascism is worse than democracy, nor that democracy creates
better conditions for the proletarian class struggle. Even if democracy
were to be considered a lesser evil than fascism, it would be stupid and
useless to support democracy in order to avoid fascism: the Italian (and
later, German) experience showed that democracy had not only been
powerless in the face of fascism, but had called fascism to its rescue.
Afraid of the proletariat, democracy actually bred fascism. The only
alternative to fascism was therefore the dictatorship of the
proletariat.

Another argument was made later by the left -- by Trotskyists, for
instance -- to support the anti-fascist policy. Capital needs fascism:
it can no longer be democratic. So if we fight for democracy, we are in
fact fighting for socialism. This is how most left-wing people (in fact,
nearly all of them) justified their attitude during the second world
war. But just as democracy breeds fascism, fascism breeds democracy.
History has demonstrated that what Bordiga argued in theory has been
realised in practice: capitalism replaces one with the other; democracy
and fascism succeed each other. Both forms have been mixed and
intermingled since 1945.

Of course the Communist International could not tolerate Bordiga's
opposition, and between 1923 and 1926 he lost the control of the Italian
Communist Party.[^02] Although he did not quite agree with Trotsky, he
took Trotsky's side against Stalin. At the Executive Committee of the
Communist International in 1926, he attacked the Russian leaders: this
was probably the last time someone publicly attacked the C.I. from
within at such a high level. Yet here it is important to note that
Bordiga failed to analyse Russia as capitalist and the C.I. as
degenerated. He did not really break with Stalinism until a few years
later.

Bordiga was in prison from 1926 to 1930, and during the 1930's he stayed
away from the very active politics of the emigration. But his influence
was strong and his friends were very active in theoretical work.

The 1930s were dominated by anti-fascism and popular fronts, which led
to preparations for a new world war. The tiny emigrant Italian left
argued that the next war could only be imperialist. The fight against
fascism through support of democracy was seen as material and
ideological preparation for this war.

After the beginning of the war, there was little opportunity for
communist action. The Italian and German left both adopted an
internationalist stand, whereas Trotskyism chose to support the allied
powers against the Axis. At that time, Bordiga still refused to define
Russia as capitalist, but he never believed -- as Trotsky did -- in
supporting whatever side the Soviet Union would be allied with. He never
agreed with the defence of the "Workers' State." One must bear in mind
that, when Russia together with Germany invaded and partitioned Poland
in 1939, Trotsky said this was a positive event, because it would alter
Polish social relations in a socialist way!

In 1943, Italy changed sides and the Republic was created, providing
opportunities for action. The Italian left created a party. They felt
that the end of the war would lead to class struggles similar in nature
to those at the end of the first world war. Did Bordiga really believe
this? He apparently understood that the situation was completely
different. The working class was this time totally under the control of
capital, which had succeeded in rallying it around the banner of
democracy. As for the losers (Germany and Japan), they were to be
occupied and thus controlled by the winners. But Bordiga did not in fact
oppose the views of the optimistic section of his group, and he kept
this attitude until his death. He tended to keep aloof from the activity
(and the activism) of his "party," and was mostly interested in
theoretical understanding and explanation. Thus he helped create and
perpetuate illusions with which he disagreed. His party lost most of its
members in a few years. At the end of the 1940's it was reduced to a
small group, as it had been before the war.

Most of Bordiga's work was theoretical. A considerable part of it dealt
with Russia. He showed that Russia was capitalist and that its
capitalism was not different in nature from the western one. The German
left (or ultra-left) was wrong on that question. To Bordiga, the
important thing was not the bureaucracy, but the essential economic laws
which the bureaucracy had to obey. These laws were the same as the ones
described in _Capital_: value accumulation, exchange of commodities,
declining rate of profit, etc. True, the Russian economy did not suffer
from over-production, but only because of its backwardness. The
ultra-left believed that Russia had altered the basic laws described by
Marx. It insisted on the control of the economy by the bureaucracy, to
which it opposed the slogan of workers' management. Bordiga said there
was no need for a new program; workers' management is a secondary
matter; workers will only be able to manage the economy if market
relations are abolished. Of course this debate went beyond the framework
of an analysis of Russia.

This conception became clear in the late 50's. Bordiga wrote several
studies on some of Marx's most important texts. In 1960 he said that the
whole of Marx's work was a description of communism. This is undoubtedly
the most profound comment made about Marx. Just as Pannekoek had
returned to the analysis of value around 1930, Bordiga returned to it
thirty years later. But what Bordiga developed was an overall conception
of the development and dynamics of exchange from its origin to its death
in communism.

Meanwhile, Bordiga retained his theory of the revolutionary movement,
which included a misconception of the inner dynamics of the proletariat.
He thought that workers would first gather on the economic level, and
alter the nature of the unions; they would then reach the political
level, thanks to the intervention of the revolutionary vanguard. It is
easy to see here the influence of Lenin. Bordiga's small party entered
unions (i.e., C.P.-controlled unions) in France and Italy, with no
results at all. Although he more or less disapproved of this, he took no
public stand against such disastrous activity.

Bordiga kept alive the core of communist theory. But he could not get
rid of Lenin's views, that is, the views of the Second International.
Therefore his action and his ideas had to be contradictory. But today it
is not hard to understand all that was -- and still is -- valid in his
work.

## IV

There are too many legends about those who tried to resist, and to keep
alive the revolutionary tradition during the long counter-revolution we
have experienced since the beginning of the 1920's. Since theory is a
necessary and indispensable part of subversion (any social movement
wants to understand what it is doing), and since the Marxist tradition
is the most accurate one, and in fact the only valid one, it is useful
to come to terms with the tendencies represented by Trotsky, Pannekoek
and Bordiga.

The first thing to know is what they actually represent. Trotsky was the
leader of a faction _within_ the Russian State, and only became an
oppositionist because he was expelled from the inner circle of Russian
leaders. As we mentioned, he always regarded himself as a citizen of the
Soviet Union, and its interests were more important to him than those of
the proletariat. Inside Russia, he was against any opposition which had
a real proletarian content, whatever its short-comings, such as the
Workers' Opposition (1920-1), the Workers' Group (1921-2), or even the
Democratic Centralists. Outside Russia, he never tried to see what the
European left communists (whether from Italy, Germany, or other
countries) really were. He died without having learned anything. There
is hardly anything in his work which can be used by us nowadays. A lot
of people were attracted by his prestige, and still are. But anyone
looking for something truly radical, and trying to ask the fundamental
questions, must go beyond him. He was a revolutionary, and an excellent
one, in one part of his life. But he belongs to the past.

Pannekoek and Bordiga are different in nature. They are products of the
best elements in the revolutionary wave in Europe after the first world
war. Surely there must be similar militants in other parts of the world,
at least in the highly developed countries -- in Japan, for instance. It
would be instructive to investigate this.

Pannekoek understood and expressed the resistance of the proletariat to
counter-revolution on an immediate level. He saw the unions as a
monopoly of variable capital, similar to ordinary monopolies which
concentrate constant capital. He described the revolution as the
taking-over of life by the masses, against the productivist, hierarchic,
and nationalist view of Stalinist _and_ social-democratic "socialism"
(largely shared by Trotskyism, and now by Maoism). But he failed to
grasp the nature of capital, or the nature of the change communism would
bring about. It its extreme form, as expressed by Pannekoek at the end
of his life, council communism becomes a system of organisation where
councils play the same role that the "party" plays in the Leninist view.
But it would be a serious mistake to identify Pannekoek with his worst
period. All the same, one cannot accept the theory of workers'
management, especially at a time when capital is looking for new ways of
integrating the workers by proposing joint participation in its
management.

This is precisely why Bordiga is important: because he regarded all of
Marx's work as an attempt to describe communism. Communism exists
potentially within the proletariat. The proletariat is the negation of
this society. It will eventually revolt against commodity production
merely to survive, because commodity production is forced to destroy it,
even physically. The revolution is neither a matter of consciousness,
nor a matter of management. This makes Bordiga very different from the
Second International, from Lenin, and from the official Communist
International. But he never managed to draw a line between the present
and the past.[^03] Now we can.

January, 1973

[^01]: In this context the German word for "union" has nothing to do
  with trade-unions (which are called Gewerkschaften in German). The
  "unions" actually fought the trade-unions.

[^02]: When he still held the majority, he resigned in favour of
  Gramsci, out of discipline.

[^03]: See, for instance, _The Fundamentals of Revolutionary Communism_,
  International Communist Party, Paris, 1972 (in English).
