---
title: A User's Guide to Détournement
author:
- Debord, Guy
- Wolman, Gil J.
date: 1956
description: Debord and Wolman's text on *Détournement*, explaining what it is and how it's done, published in *Les Lèvres Nues*. This version is from <http://www.bopsecrets.org/SI/detourn.htm>, translated from the original [French article](http://sami.is.free.fr/Oeuvres/debord_wolman_mode_emploi_detournement.html). An alternative translation can be found [here](http://www.cddc.vt.edu/sionline/presitu/usersguide.html). All footnotes were added by Bureau of Public Secrets.
keywords: Détournement
...

Every reasonably aware person of our time is aware of the obvious fact
that art can no longer be justified as a superior activity, or even as a
compensatory activity to which one might honorably devote oneself. The
reason for this deterioration is clearly the emergence of productive
forces that necessitate other production relations and a new practice of
life. In the civil-war phase we are engaged in, and in close connection
with the orientation we are discovering for certain superior activities
to come, we believe that all known means of expression are going to
converge in a general movement of propaganda that must encompass all the
perpetually interacting aspects of social reality.

There are several conflicting opinions about the forms and even the very
nature of educative propaganda, opinions that generally reflect one or
another currently fashionable variety of reformist politics. Suffice it
to say that in our view the premises for revolution, on the cultural as
well as the strictly political level, are not only ripe, they have begun
to rot. It is not just returning to the past which is reactionary; even
"modern" cultural objectives are ultimately reactionary since they
depend on ideological formulations of a past society that has prolonged
its death agony to the present. The only historically justified tactic
is extremist innovation.

The literary and artistic heritage of humanity should be used for
partisan propaganda purposes. It is, of course, necessary to go beyond
any idea of mere scandal. Since opposition to the bourgeois notion of
art and artistic genius has become pretty much old hat, [Marcel
Duchamp's] drawing of a mustache on the Mona Lisa is no more interesting
than the original version of that painting. We must now push this
process to the point of negating the negation. Bertolt Brecht, revealing
in a recent interview in *France-Observateur* that he makes cuts in the
classics of the theater in order to make the performances more
educative, is much closer than Duchamp to the revolutionary orientation
we are calling for. We must note, however, that in Brecht's case these
salutary alterations are narrowly limited by his unfortunate respect for
culture as defined by the ruling class -- that same respect, taught in
the newspapers of the workers parties as well as in the primary schools
of the bourgeoisie, which leads even the reddest worker districts of
Paris always to prefer *The Cid* over [Brecht's] *Mother Courage*.

It is in fact necessary to eliminate all remnants of the notion of
personal property in this area. The appearance of new necessities
outmodes previous "inspired" works. They become obstacles, dangerous
habits. The point is not whether we like them or not. We have to go
beyond them.

Any elements, no matter where they are taken from, can be used to make
new combinations. The discoveries of modern poetry regarding the
analogical structure of images demonstrate that when two objects are
brought together, no matter how far apart their original contexts may
be, a relationship is always formed. Restricting oneself to a personal
arrangement of words is mere convention. The mutual interference of two
worlds of feeling, or the juxtaposition of two independent expressions,
supersedes the original elements and produces a synthetic organization
of greater efficacy. Anything can be used.

It goes without saying that one is not limited to correcting a work or
to integrating diverse fragments of out-of-date works into a new one;
one can also alter the meaning of those fragments in any appropriate
way, leaving the imbeciles to their slavish reference to "citations."

Such parodistic methods have often been used to obtain comical effects.
But such humor is the result of contradictions within a condition whose
existence is taken for granted. Since the world of literature seems to
us almost as distant as the Stone Age, such contradictions don't make us
laugh. It is thus necessary to envisage a parodic-serious stage where
the accumulation of detourned elements, far from aiming to arouse
indignation or laughter by alluding to some original work, will express
our indifference toward a meaningless and forgotten original, and
concern itself with rendering a certain sublimity.

Lautréamont advanced so far in this direction that he is still partially
misunderstood even by his most ostentatious admirers. In spite of his
obvious application of this method to theoretical language in *Poésies*
-- where Lautréamont (drawing particularly on the maxims of Pascal and
Vauvenargues) strives to reduce the argument, through successive
concentrations, to maxims alone -- a certain Viroux caused considerable
astonishment three or four years ago by conclusively demonstrating that
Maldoror is one vast détournement of Buffon and other works of natural
history, among other things. The fact that the prosaists of Figaro, like
Viroux himself, were able to see this as a justification for disparaging
Lautréamont, and that others believed they had to defend him by praising
his insolence, only testifies to the senility of these two camps of
dotards in courtly combat with each other. A slogan like "Plagiarism is
necessary, progress implies it" is still as poorly understood, and for
the same reasons, as the famous phrase about the poetry that "must be
made by all."^[The two quoted phrases are from Isidore Ducasse's
*Poésies*. Lautréamont was the pseudonym used by Ducasse for his other
work, *Maldoror*. The "Plagiarism is necessary" passage was later
plagiarized by Debord in thesis #207 of *The Society of the Spectacle*.]

Apart from Lautréamont's work -- whose appearance so far ahead of its
time has to a great extent preserved it from a detailed examination --
the tendencies toward détournement that can be observed in contemporary
expression are for the most part unconscious or accidental. It is in the
advertising industry, more than in the domain of decaying aesthetic
production, that one can find the best examples.

We can first of all define two main categories of detourned elements,
without considering whether or not their being brought together is
accompanied by corrections introduced in the originals. These are *minor
détournements* and *deceptive détournements*.

Minor détournement is the détournement of an element which has no
importance in itself and which thus draws all its meaning from the new
context in which it has been placed. For example, a press clipping, a
neutral phrase, a commonplace photograph.

Deceptive détournement, also termed premonitory-proposition
détournement, is in contrast the détournement of an intrinsically
significant element, which derives a different scope from the new
context. A slogan of Saint-Just, for example, or a film sequence from
Eisenstein.

Extensive detourned works will thus usually be composed of one or more
series of deceptive and minor détournements.

Several laws on the use of détournement can now be formulated.

*It is the most distant detourned element which contributes most sharply
to the overall impression, and not the elements that directly determine
the nature of this impression.* For example, in a metagraph relating to
the Spanish Civil War the phrase with the most distinctly revolutionary
sense is a fragment from a lipstick ad: "Pretty lips are red." In
another metagraph (*The Death of J.H.*) 125 classified ads of bars for
sale express a suicide more strikingly than the newspaper articles that
recount it.^[The "metagraph," a genre developed by the lettrists, is a
sort of collage with largely textual elements. The two metagraphs
mentioned here are both by Debord, and can be found in his *Oeuvres* (p.
127).]

*The distortions introduced in the detourned elements must be as
simplified as possible, since the main impact of a détournement is
directly related to the conscious or semiconscious recollection of the
original contexts of the elements.* This is well known. Let us simply
note that if this dependence on memory implies that one must determine
one's public before devising a détournement, this is only a particular
case of a general law that governs not only détournement but also any
other form of action on the world. The idea of pure, absolute expression
is dead; it only temporarily survives in parodic form as long as our
other enemies survive.

*Détournement is less effective the more it approaches a rational
reply.* This is the case with a rather large number of Lautréamont's
altered maxims. The more the rational character of the reply is
apparent, the more indistinguishable it becomes from the ordinary spirit
of repartee, which similarly uses the opponent's words against him. This
is naturally not limited to spoken language. It was in this connection
that we objected to the project of some of our comrades who proposed to
detourn an anti-Soviet poster of the fascist organization "Peace and
Liberty" -- which proclaimed, amid images of overlapping flags of the
Western powers, "Union makes strength" -- by adding onto it a smaller
sheet with the phrase "and coalitions make war."

*Détournement by simple reversal is always the most direct and the least
effective.* Thus, the Black Mass reacts against the construction of an
ambience based on a given metaphysics by constructing an ambience within
the same framework that merely reverses -- and thus simultaneously
conserves -- the values of that metaphysics. Such reversals may
nevertheless have a certain progressive aspect. For example, Clemenceau
[nicknamed "The Tiger"] could be referred to as "The Tiger Named
Clemenceau."

Of the four laws that have just been set forth, the first is essential
and applies universally. The other three are practically applicable only
to deceptive detourned elements.

The first visible consequences of a widespread use of détournement,
apart from its intrinsic propaganda powers, will be the revival of a
multitude of bad books, and thus the extensive (unintended)
participation of their unknown authors; an increasingly extensive
transformation of phrases or plastic works that happen to be in fashion;
and above all an ease of production far surpassing in quantity, variety
and quality the automatic writing that has bored us for so long.

Détournement not only leads to the discovery of new aspects of talent;
in addition, clashing head-on with all social and legal conventions, it
cannot fail to be a powerful cultural weapon in the service of a real
class struggle. The cheapness of its products is the heavy artillery
that breaks through all the Chinese walls of understanding.^[The authors
are detourning a sentence from the *Communist Manifesto*: "The cheapness
of the bourgeoisie's commodities is the heavy artillery with which it
batters down all Chinese walls, with which it forces the barbarians'
intensely obstinate hatred of foreigners to capitulate."] It is a real
means of proletarian artistic education, the first step toward a
*literary communism*.

Ideas and creations in the realm of détournement can be multiplied at
will. For the moment we will limit ourselves to showing a few concrete
possibilities in various current sectors of communication -- it being
understood that these separate sectors are significant only in relation
to present-day technologies, and are all tending to merge into superior
syntheses with the advance of these technologies.

Apart from the various direct uses of detourned phrases in posters,
records and radio broadcasts, the two main applications of detourned
prose are metagraphic writings and, to a lesser degree, the adroit
perversion of the classical novel form.

There is not much future in the détournement of complete novels, but
during the transitional phase there might be a certain number of
undertakings of this sort. Such a détournement gains by being
accompanied by illustrations whose relationships to the text are not
immediately obvious. In spite of undeniable difficulties, we believe it
would be possible to produce an instructive psychogeographical
détournement of George Sand's Consuelo, which thus decked out could be
relaunched on the literary market disguised under some innocuous title
like "Life in the Suburbs," or even under a title itself detourned, such
as "The Lost Patrol." (It would be a good idea to reuse in this way many
titles of deteriorated old films of which nothing else remains, or of
the films that continue to deaden the minds of young people in the
cinema clubs.)

Metagraphic writing, no matter how outdated its plastic framework may
be, presents far richer opportunities for detourning prose, as well as
other appropriate objects or images. One can get some idea of this from
the project, conceived in 1951 but eventually abandoned for lack of
sufficient financial means, which envisaged a pinball machine arranged
in such a way that the play of the lights and the more or less
predictable trajectories of the balls would form a metagraphic-spatial
composition entitled *Thermal Sensations and Desires of People Passing
by the Gates of the Cluny Museum Around an Hour after Sunset in
November*. We have since come to realize that a situationist-analytic
enterprise cannot scientifically advance by way of such works. The means
nevertheless remain suitable for less ambitious goals.

It is obviously in the realm of the cinema that détournement can attain
its greatest effectiveness and, for those concerned with this aspect,
its greatest beauty.

The powers of film are so extensive, and the absence of coordination of
those powers is so glaring, that virtually any film that is above the
miserable average can provide matter for endless polemics among
spectators or professional critics. Only the conformism of those people
prevents them from discovering equally appealing charms and equally
glaring faults even in the worst films. To cut through this absurd
confusion of values, we can observe that Griffith's *Birth of a Nation*
is one of the most important films in the history of the cinema because
of its wealth of innovations. On the other hand, it is a racist film and
therefore absolutely does not merit being shown in its present form. But
its total prohibition could be seen as regrettable from the point of
view of the secondary, but potentially worthier, domain of the cinema.
It would be better to detourn it as a whole, without necessarily even
altering the montage, by adding a soundtrack that made a powerful
denunciation of the horrors of imperialist war and of the activities of
the Ku Klux Klan, which are continuing in the United States even now.

Such a détournement -- a very moderate one -- is in the final analysis
nothing more than the moral equivalent of the restoration of old
paintings in museums. But most films only merit being cut up to compose
other works. This reconversion of preexisting sequences will obviously
be accompanied by other elements, musical or pictorial as well as
historical. While the cinematic rewriting of history has until now been
largely along the lines of Sacha Guitry's burlesque re-creations, one
could have Robespierre say, before his execution: "In spite of so many
trials, my experience and the grandeur of my task convinces me that all
is well." If in this case an appropriate reuse of a Greek tragedy
enables us to exalt Robespierre, we can conversely imagine a
neorealist-type sequence, at the counter of a truck stop bar, for
example, with one of the truck drivers saying seriously to another:
"Ethics was formerly confined to the books of the philosophers; we have
introduced it into the governing of nations." One can see that this
juxtaposition illuminates Maximilien's idea, the idea of a dictatorship
of the proletariat.^[In the first imagined scene a phrase from a Greek
tragedy (Sophocles's *Oedipus at Colonus*) is put in the mouth of French
Revolution leader Maximilien Robespierre. In the second, a phrase from
Robespierre is put in the mouth of a truck driver.]

The light of détournement is propagated in a straight line. To the
extent that new architecture seems to have to begin with an experimental
baroque stage, the *architectural complex* -- which we conceive as the
construction of a dynamic environment related to styles of behavior --
will probably detourn existing architectural forms, and in any case will
make plastic and emotional use of all sorts of detourned objects:
careful arrangements of such things as cranes or metal scaffolding
replacing a defunct sculptural tradition. This is shocking only to the
most fanatical admirers of French-style gardens. It is said that in his
old age D'Annunzio, that pro-fascist swine, had the prow of a torpedo
boat in his park. Leaving aside his patriotic motives, the idea of such
a monument is not without a certain charm.

If détournement were extended to urbanistic realizations, not many
people would remain unaffected by an exact reconstruction in one city of
an entire neighborhood of another. Life can never be too disorienting:
détournement on this level would really spice it up.

Titles themselves, as we have already seen, are a basic element of
détournement. This follows from two general observations: that all
titles are interchangeable and that they have a decisive importance in
several genres. The detective stories in the "Série Noir" are all
extremely similar, yet merely continually changing the titles suffices
to hold a considerable audience. In music a title always exerts a great
influence, yet the choice of one is quite arbitrary. Thus it wouldn't be
a bad idea to make a final correction to the title of the "Eroica
Symphony" by changing it, for example, to "Lenin Symphony."[^note-5]

The title contributes strongly to the détournement of a work, but there
is an inevitable counteraction of the work on the title. Thus one can
make extensive use of specific titles taken from scientific publications
("Coastal Biology of Temperate Seas") or military ones ("Night Combat of
Small Infantry Units"), or even of many phrases found in illustrated
children's books ("Marvelous Landscapes Greet the Voyagers").

In closing, we should briefly mention some aspects of what we call
ultra-détournement, that is, the tendencies for détournement to operate
in everyday social life. Gestures and words can be given other meanings,
and have been throughout history for various practical reasons. The
secret societies of ancient China made use of quite subtle recognition
signals encompassing the greater part of social behavior (the manner of
arranging cups; of drinking; quotations of poems interrupted at
agreed-on points). The need for a secret language, for passwords, is
inseparable from a tendency toward play. Ultimately, any sign or word is
susceptible to being converted into something else, even into its
opposite. The royalist insurgents of the Vendée,^[*The Vendée*: region
in southwestern France, locale of a pro-monarchist revolt against the
Revolutionary government (1793-1796).] because they bore the disgusting
image of the Sacred Heart of Jesus, were called the Red Army. In the
limited domain of political war vocabulary this expression was
completely detourned within a century.

Outside of language, it is possible to use the same methods to detourn
clothing, with all its strong emotional connotations. Here again we find
the notion of disguise closely linked to play. Finally, when we have got
to the stage of constructing situations -- the ultimate goal of all our
activity -- everyone will be free to detourn entire situations by
deliberately changing this or that determinant condition of them.

The methods that we have briefly examined here are presented not as our
own invention, but as a generally widespread practice which we propose
to systematize.

In itself, the theory of détournement scarcely interests us. But we find
it linked to almost all the constructive aspects of the presituationist
period of transition. Thus its enrichment, through practice, seems
necessary.

We will postpone the development of these theses until later.

**Translator's Note:** The French word *détournement* means deflection,
diversion, rerouting, distortion, misuse, misappropriation, hijacking,
or otherwise turning something aside from its normal course or purpose.
It has sometimes been translated as "diversion," but this word is
confusing because of its more common meaning of idle entertainment. Like
most other English-speaking people who have actually practiced
détournement, I have chosen simply to anglicize the French word.

For more on détournement, see theses 204-209 of [Society of the
Spectacle](https://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/debord/society.htm).

[^note-5]: Beethoven originally named his third symphony after Napoleon
    (seen as a defender of the French Revolution), but when Napoleon
    crowned himself emperor he angrily tore up the dedication to him and
    renamed it "Eroica."

	The implied respect in this passage for Lenin (like the passing
    references to "workers states" in Debord's "Report on the
    Construction of Situations") is a vestige of the lettrists' early,
    less politically sophisticated period, when they seem to have been
    sort of anarcho-Trotskyist.
