---
title: Welcome to Socialisme ou Barbarie
author: Gauche Communiste de France
date: 1949
description: Written by Marc Chirik for Internationalisme. Reproduced in English, with a detailed introduction, by the International Communist Current in International Review 161. From <https://en.internationalism.org/international-review/201711/14445/communism-agenda-history-castoriadis-munis-and-problem-breaking-tr>.
...

The first issue of a new revolutionary review called _Socialisme ou
Barbarie_ has just appeared in France.

In the sombre situation in which the workers' movement in France and the
rest of the world finds itself today, a situation marked by a course
towards war, in which the rare revolutionary groups -- expressions of
the life and state of consciousness of the proletarian class -- who
still survive thanks to a determined desire to act and a constant
ideological effort, are becoming a little weaker each day; in a
situation where the revolutionary press is reduced to a few small
duplicated bulletins, the appearance of a new printed review, an "organ
of criticism and revolutionary orientation" is an important event which
every militant can only welcome and encourage.

Whatever the breadth of our disagreements with the positions of
_Socialisme ou Barbarie_, and whatever the future evolution of this
review, on the basis of the fundamental positions and general
orientation expressed in this first issue, we must consider this group
as undeniably proletarian and revolutionary. That is to say, we welcome
its existence, and will follow with sympathy and interest its future
activity and efforts. Since revolutionary sympathy is above all based on
paying attention to political positions, we intend to examine the ideas
put forward by _Socialisme ou Barbarie_ without prejudice and with the
greatest of care, to analyse them as they evolve, criticising what seems
erroneous in them and in such cases countering them with our own views.
We see this not with the aim of carrying out a vain polemic based on
denigration -- something which has become only too common among groups
and which deeply repels us -- but, however lively the discussion might
be, as being exclusively geared towards the confrontation and
clarification of positions.

_Socialisme ou Barbarie_ is the organ of a tendency which has just
broken with the Trotskyist party, the Chaulieu-Montal tendency. It is a
political tendency known among the milieu of militants in France and we
have spoken about it on several occasions, and again quite
recently,[^01] not in exactly tender terms. This perhaps demands a
supplementary explanation on our part.

Examining the Trotskyist movement in France and noting that it once
again, for the umpteenth time, finds itself in a state of crisis, we
posed the question whether this crisis had a positive significance from
the point of view of revolutionary formation. We replied with a
categorical No, and for the following reason. Trotskyism, which was one
of the proletarian reactions within the Communist International during
the first years of its degeneration, never went beyond this position of
being an opposition, despite its formal constitution into an organically
separate party. By remaining attached to the Communist Parties -- which
it still sees as workers' parties --even after the triumph of Stalinism,
Trotskyism itself functions as an appendage to Stalinism. It is linked
ideologically to Stalinism and follows it around like a shadow. All the
activity of Trotskyism over the last 15 years proves this. From 1932-33
where it supported the possibility of the victory of the proletarian
revolution in Germany under Stalinist leadership, to its participation
in the 1939-45 war, in the Resistance and the Liberation, via the
Popular Front, anti-fascism and participation in the war in Spain,
Trotskyism has merely walked in the footsteps of Stalinism. In the wake
of the latter, Trotskyism has also contributed powerfully to introducing
into the workers' movement habits and methods of organisation and forms
of activity (bluff, intrigue, burrowing from within, insults and
manoeuvres of all kinds) which are so many active factors in the
corruption and destruction of any revolutionary activity. This doesn't
mean that revolutionary workers who only have a little political
education have not been drawn into its ranks. On the contrary, as an
organisation, as a political milieu, Trotskyism, far from favouring the
development of revolutionary thought and of the organisms (fractions and
tendencies) which express it, is an organised milieu for undermining it.
This is a general rule valid for any political organisation alien to the
proletariat, and experience has demonstrated that it applies to
Stalinism and Trotskyism. We have known Trotskyism over 15 years of
perpetual crisis, through splits and unifications, followed by further
splits and crises, but we don't know examples which have given rise to
real, viable revolutionary tendencies. Trotskyism does not secrete
within itself a revolutionary ferment. On the contrary, it annihilates
it. The condition for the existence and development of a revolutionary
ferment is to be outside the organisational and ideological framework of
Trotskyism.

The constitution of the Chaulieu-Montal tendency within the Trotskyist
organisation, and precisely after the latter had sunk itself up to its
neck in the second imperialist war, the Resistance and national
liberation, did not, with good reason, inspire much confidence towards
it on our part. This tendency was formed on the basis of the theory of
bureaucratic collectivism in the USSR and consequently rejected any
defence of the latter. But what value could this position of non-defence
of the USSR have when your practice is to co-habit in an organisation
whose activity clearly and concretely resides in the defence of Russian
state capitalism and participation in imperialist war? Not only did the
Chaulieu-Montal tendency find its cohabitation in the organisation
possible, it participated actively, and at all levels, in the activism
typical of Trotskyism, based on bluff and mystification, in all its
electoral, trade union and other campaigns. Furthermore, we could hardly
avoid being unfavourably impressed by the behaviour of this tendency,
made up of manoeuvres, combinations, dubious compromises, aimed more at
seizing control of the leadership of the party than at developing the
consciousness of its militants. The prolonged hesitations of the members
of the tendency to leave the organisation -- at the last congress, in
summer 1948, they were still accepting being elected to the central
committee -- denotes both their political incoherence, their illusion in
the possibility of re-dressing the Trotskyist organisation, and finally
their total incomprehension of the political and organisational
conditions indispensable to the elaboration of revolutionary thought and
orientation.

The overall judgment we made of this tendency in recent issues of
_Internationalisme_, however severe it might have been, was absolutely
well-founded. We must however make a correction concerning its
definitive character. The Chaulieu tendency was not liquidated, as we
presented it, but found the strength, albeit after a very long delay, to
break with the Trotskyist organisation and form itself into an
autonomous group. Despite the heavy weight of this heritage on the
group, this fact represents a new element that opens the possibility of
its later evolution. The future alone will tell us to what extent it
constitutes a gain in the formation of a new revolutionary movement. But
right now we must say to them that they won't be able to carry out this
task unless they rid themselves completely and as quickly as possible of
the scars they have inherited from Trotskyism and which can still be
felt in the first issue of their review.

It's not our intention here to make a deep and detailed analysis of the
positions of the _Socialisme ou Barbarie_ group. We will come back to
this another time. Today we will limit ourselves to observing that,
after reading their first issue, this is a group in evolution, and that
its positions are anything but fixed. This should not be seen as a
reproach, far from it. This group rather seems to be moving away from
its fixed position about a third class, the bureaucracy, and from the
idea of a dual historical antithesis to capitalism; either socialism or
bureaucratic collectivism. This position, which was previously the only
reason for its existence as a tendency, was a dead-end both at the level
of theoretical research and of practical revolutionary activity. It's
because it seems today to be abandoning, if only partially, this
conception of a historical opposition between statism and capitalism, in
favour of seeing statification as a tendency inherent in capitalism in
the present period, that this group is managing to get a more correct
appreciation of the present trade union movement and its necessary
integration into the state apparatus.

We want to draw attention to a very interesting study by A. Carrier on
the cartel of autonomous unions, in which through his pen the group
_Socialisme ou Barbarie_ for the first time expresses "our position on
the historically obsolete nature of trade unionism as a proletarian
weapon against exploitation".

However, we are a bit surprised to learn, after such a clear declaration
on the historically obsolete character of trade unionism, that this
position does not lead _Socialisme ou Barbarie_ to refuse to take part
in any trade union life. The reason for this practical attitude, which
is in contradiction with the whole analysis made of the trade union
movement, is formulated thus: "we go where the workers are, not just
because they are there, so to speak, physically, but because that's
where they struggle, with more or less effectiveness, against all forms
of exploitation". What's more, participation in the unions is justified
by saying: "We are not uninterested in the question of demands. We are
convinced that in all circumstances there are correct demand slogans
which, without resolving the problem of exploitation, assure the defence
of the elementary material interests of the class, a defence which has
to be organised on a daily basis faced with the daily attacks of
capitalism". And this after having, with the support of figures,
demonstrated that "capitalism has reached the point where it can no
longer give anything, where it can only take back what it has given. Not
only is any reform impossible, but even the present level of poverty
can't be maintained". From this point, the significance of the immediate
programme has changed.

This whole study on "The cartel of united trade union action" is
extremely interesting, but while it provides a valid analysis of trade
unionism in the present period, it is also a very striking manifestation
of the contradictory state of the _Socialisme ou Barbarie_ group. The
objective analysis of the evolution of modern capitalism towards
statification, both of the economy and of the economic organisations of
the workers (an analysis which is that of the groups of the ultra-left,
to which we belong) is in competition with the old traditional
subjective attitude of participation and activity in the trade union
organisation, an attitude inherited from Trotskyism from which they have
not fully disengaged.

A good part of this number of _Socialisme ou Barbarie_ is devoted to
polemics with the Trotskyist Parti Communiste Internationaliste. This is
very understandable. Leaving a political organisation, where you have a
whole past of militancy and conviction, doesn't take place without a
kind of emotional crisis, and often involves personal recriminations,
which is quite natural. But here we are dealing with a polemic and a
polemical tone which is well out of proportion.

We are thinking of the article by Chaulieu "Useless Mouths", which is
aimed at clearing a member of the group, Lefort, of the accusations made
against him by _La Vérité_. We can well understand the strong
indignation that can be provoked by this kind of accusation, full of
hypocritical insinuations and malicious allusions. But Chaulieu doesn't
manage to keep things at a certain level, and in his reply he indulges
in a regrettable grossness and vulgarity. Wordplay around the name of
Pierre Frank is really worthy of a naughty schoolboy and doesn't really
have a place in a revolutionary publication. Once again we are in the
presence of the decomposition which has been infecting the workers'
movement for years. The precondition for the reconstitution of a new
revolutionary movement is to free itself of this venomous tradition
imported by Stalinism, and maintained, among others, by Trotskyism. We
can never insist too much on this "moral" aspect, which is one of the
foundation-stones of revolutionary work in the immediate and in the
future. This is why we were so disagreeably impressed to find this
malodorous polemic in the columns of the first issue of _Socialisme ou
Barbarie_. We should also point out that, caught up in the fires of
polemic, Chaulieu and his friends have forgotten to reply to one of the
key questions which gave rise to this polemic, i.e. whether or not it's
possible to carry out research into problems of the revolutionary
movement through any publication that offers you its columns.

In _Internationalisme_ we have already looked at this question, and the
conclusion we arrived at is in the negative. Today there is an
anguishing problem of a lack of means of expression for revolutionary
thought. Every thinking revolutionary militant has had this feeling of
being stifled and feels the need to break out of the silence which has
been imposed on them. But beyond the subjective aspect of the problem
there is a political problem linked to the present situation. We can't
find relief by depositing our thoughts anywhere: we have to make our
thought an effective weapon of the proletarian class struggle. Have
Lefort, Chaulieu and their friends asked themselves what is the result
of collaborating with a literary and philosophical review like Sartre's
_Les Temps Modernes_?

This kind of collaboration will not only produce little more than
'revolutionary' verbiage, but it will also give credibility among
militants to a review, an ideological current towards which the greatest
political and ideological reserve is necessary. In this way, instead of
clarifying things by distinguishing between different currents, you only
end up increasing confusion. It shows a real lack of understanding of
the conditions for revolutionary research to turn Sartre and his review
-- for whom the political application of his philosophy means support
for the RDR[^02] -- into a place, a milieu, for discussion about the
role played by Trotsky and Trotskyism in the degeneration of the
Communist International. Revolutionary theoretical research can never be
the topic of conversation in a salon, or provide a theory for
left-leaning literary types. However pitiful the means of expression
available to the revolutionary proletariat, it's only in this framework
that you can work towards the elaboration of the theory of the class.
Working on, improving, developing these means of expression is the only
way for militants to make their thought and action effective. Trying to
use means of expression that don't belong to the organisms of the class
always denotes an intellectualist and petty bourgeois tendency. The fact
that this problem is completely neglected in the polemic written by
_Socialisme ou Barbarie_ proves that it has not even grasped, let alone
solved, the problem. We think that this too is very significant.

Before engaging in a critical examination of the positions defended by
the _Socialisme ou Barbarie_ group, we think that it's necessary to
pause a moment at another point, which is also highly characteristic:
the manner in which this group presents itself. It would be wrong to
consider that this is something without any importance. The idea one has
of oneself, and the appreciation one has of other groups, is intimately
linked to the general conceptions one professes. It is often this aspect
which is most revealing about the nature of a group. In every case it is
an indispensable element which makes it immediately possible to grasp
the underlying conceptions of a group.

Here are two extracts from the leading article of the first issue of the
review, an article which is in some ways the credo or political platform
of the group.

Talking about the present-day workers' movement, and having noted the
complete alienation of the masses in anti-working class ideologies, the
review writes:

>"The only ones that seem to be keeping afloat in this universal deluge
are weak organisations like the '4th International', the anarchist
federations, and a few so-called 'ultra-left' groups (Bordigists,
Spartacists, council communists). Organisations which are weak, not
because of their meagre numbers -- which in itself means nothing, and is
not a criterion -- but above all because of their lack of ideological
and political content. Linked much more to the past than to the
anticipation of the future, these organisations already find themselves
absolutely incapable of understanding the social development of the 20th
century, and even less of orienting themselves positively in response to
it"

And, having enumerated the weaknesses of Trotskyism and anarchism, the
article continues a few lines later:

>"Finally, the 'ultra-left' grouplets either passionately cultivate
their sectarian deformations, like the Bordigists, sometimes going so
far as to making the proletariat responsible for their own incapacity,
or, like the council communists, content themselves with drawing up, on
the basis of past experience, recipes for the 'socialist' kitchens of
the future.... Despite their delirious pretensions, both the '4th
International' and the anarchists and the ultra-lefts are in truth
nothing but historical memories, tiny scabs on the wounds of the class,
doomed to disappear with the rise of the new skin being prepared in the
underlying tissues" (p. 9).

So much for the other existing tendencies and groups. It thus becomes
understandable that, after such a severe judgment, a condemnation
without appeal of the others, you present yourself in these terms:

>"By presenting ourselves today, through the means of this review, to
the vanguard of manual and intellectual workers, we are the only ones
responding in a systematic way to the fundamental problems of the
contemporary revolutionary movement; we think that we are the only ones
taking up and continuing the marxist analysis of the modern economy,
posing on a scientific basis the problem of the historical development
of the workers' movement and its meaning, defining Stalinism and the
'workers'' bureaucracy in general, and finally, posing the revolutionary
perspective by taking into account the original elements created by our
epoch ... We think that we represent the living continuation of marxism
in the framework of contemporary society. In this sense we have no fear
of being confused with all the editors of 'marxist' publications seeking
'clarification', all the men of good will, all the chatterers and
gossips. If _we_ pose problems, it's because _we_ think that we _can
resolve them_" (our underlining).

This is a language in which pretension and limitless self-flattery is
only equalled by the ignorance shown about the revolutionary movement,
its groups and tendencies, its work and its theoretical struggles over
the last 30 years. Ignorance explains a lot, but it is not a
justification and still less does it entitle you to claim a glorious
medal for yourself. What medal authorises the _Socialisme ou Barbarie_
group to speak so dismissively of the recent past of the revolutionary
movement, its internal struggles, and its groups, whose only fault is to
have posed some ten or twenty years in advance the problems which _SouB_
in its ignorance claims to have discovered today?

The fact of having come into political life very recently during the
course of the war, and even more the fact that it has come from the
politically corrupted organisation of Trotskyism, in whose swamp it was
floundering up till 1949, should not be invoked as a certificate of
honour, as a guarantee of political maturity. The arrogant tone here
bears witness to the evident ignorance of this group, which has not yet
sufficiently freed itself from ways of thinking and discussing that
derive from Trotskyism. If it looked at things in a different way, it
would be seen quite easily that the ideas it announces today, and which
it considers to be its original work, are for the most part a more or
less happy reproduction of the ideas put forward by the left currents of
the Third International (the Russian Workers' Opposition, the
Spartacists in Germany, the Council Communists in Holland, the Communist
Left of Italy) over the course of the past 25 years.

If, instead of contenting itself with a few bits of knowledge and even
of hearsay, the _Socialisme ou Barbarie_ group had taken the trouble to
make a deeper study of the many, though hard-to-find, documents of these
left currents, it might perhaps have lost its pretensions to
originality, but it would assuredly have gained in depth.

[^01]: _Internationalisme_ 41, January 1949, in the article 'Where are
  we?'.

[^02]: ICC note: Rassemblement Démocratique Révolutionnaire: a
  short-lived party formed by Sartre in 1947 along with various left
  social democrats and Trotskyists.
