---
title: "Present Problems of the Workers' Movement: Against the Concept of the \"Brilliant Leader\""
author: Gauche Communiste de France
date: 1947
description: This text was published in French in Internationalisme 25 in August 1947, with other texts, as part of a larger article (itself part of a series) titled "Present Problems of the Workers' Movement." The International Communist Current republished this text in English in International Review 33, available online at <https://en.internationalism.org/ir/033/concept-of-brilliant-leader>. French original at <https://archivesautonomies.org/spip.php?article1821>.
...

In politics, there's nothing new in a group radically changing its way
of seeing and acting once it has become a big organisation, a mass
party. One could cite several examples of such metamorphoses. One could
to some extent apply it to the Bolshevik party after the revolution. But
what's striking about the International Communist Party of Italy is the
surprising rapidity with which its main leaders have undergone such a
change. And this is all the more surprising in that the Italian Party,
both numerically and functionally, is in essence an enlarged fraction.

How are we to explain this change? For example: at the time that it was
founded the Italian Communist Party, animated by the leadership of the
Left and of Bordiga, was always an 'enfant terrible' in the Communist
International. Refusing to submit _a priori_ to the absolute authority
of leaders -- even those it held in the greatest regard -- the Italian
CP insisted on freely discussing and, if necessary, fighting against any
political position it didn't agree with. As soon as the CI was formed,
Bordiga's fraction was in opposition on many points and openly expressed
its disagreements with Lenin and other leaders of the Bolshevik party,
the Russian revolution, and the CI. The debates between Lenin and
Bordiga at the Second Congress are well known. At this time nobody
thought about questioning this right to free discussion; no one saw it
as an insult to the authority of the 'leaders'. Perhaps men as feeble
and servile as Cachin^[A former socialist member of parliament, the
principal private secretary of the socialist minister Sembat during the
First World War. A confirmed national chauvinist, he was charged with
the task of handing over the French government stocks to Mussolini to
campaign for Italy to enter the war on the side of the Entente... In
1920 he became a partisan of the CI where he continued his parliamentary
career and was the flabbiest partisan of Stalin up to his death.]
believed in their heart of hearts that this was scandalous, but they
wouldn't have dared to admit it. Moreover, discussion wasn't seen simply
as a right but as a **duty**; the confrontation and study of ideas were
the only way of elaborating the programmatic and political positions
required for revolutionary action.

Lenin wrote: "It is the duty of communist militants to verify for
themselves resolutions coming from the higher bodies of the party.
Anyone in politics who believes in mere words is an incorrigible idiot."
And we know what contempt Lenin had for such 'incorrigible idiots'.
Lenin insisted time and again on the necessity for the political
education of militants. Learning and understanding could only develop
through free discussion, through the general confrontation of ideas,
involving each and every militant. This wasn't simply a question of
pedagogy, but a fundamental precondition for political elaboration, for
the progress of the movement for the emancipation of the proletariat.

After the victory of Stalinism and the exclusion of the left from the
CI, the Italian Fraction never stopped fighting against the myth of the
infallible leader. Within the left opposition, in contrast to Trotsky,
it insisted on making the greatest efforts towards the critical
examination of the positions of the past, towards theoretical research
via the widest possible discussion of new problems. The Italian Fraction
dedicated itself to this work before the war. But it never claimed to
have resolved all the problems and it is well known that there were
divisions within it on questions of the utmost importance.

It has to be said that all these excellent traditions and practices have
disappeared with the foundation of the new Party. The ICP is today the
group where the least amount of theoretical and political discussion
takes place. The war and the post-war period have given rise to a whole
number of new problems. None of these problems are being looked at
within the Italian Party. It's enough to read the texts and papers of
the Party to see their extreme theoretical poverty. When one reads the
proceedings of the Founding Conference of the Party, one wonders whether
this conference took place in 1946 or 1926. And one of the leaders of
the Party -- comrade Damen if we're not mistaken -- was right when he
said that the Party was starting again from the positions of ... 1925.
But what for him represents a strength (the positions of 1925) expresses
more than anything else a terrible theoretical and political
**backwardness**, the extreme weakness of the Party.

No period in the history of the workers' movement has overturned so many
fundamental ideas and posed so many new problems as the relatively brief
period between 1927 and 1947, not even such a momentous period as the
one between 1905 and 1925. Most of the fundamental theses upon which the
CI was founded have become obsolete. The positions on the national and
colonial question, on tactics, on democratic slogans, on
parliamentarism, on the unions, on the party and its relationship to the
class: all these have had to be radically revised. What's more, answers
have to be given to questions such as the state after the revolution,
the dictatorship of the proletariat, the characteristics of decadent
capitalism, fascism, state capitalism, permanent imperialist war, the
new forms of struggle and unitary organisation in the working class. A
whole series of problems which the CI hardly began to deal with, and
which appeared after the degeneration of the CI.

When in the face of the immense problems one reads the interventions at
the Turin Conference, which repeat the litanies the old problems of
Lenin in "An Infantile Disorder", and which were already out of date at
the time he defended them; when one sees the Party returning, as though
nothing has changed, to the old positions of 1924 in participating in
bourgeois elections and struggling within the unions, one can see the
whole political backwardness of this Party, the vast distance it still
has to cover.

And yet this Party, which, we repeat, is a considerable regression in
comparison to the work of the Fraction before the war, is the one which
is most strongly opposed to any internal and public political
discussion. It's in this Party that ideological life is the most
colourless. How are we to explain this?

The explanation was given by one of the leaders of this party, in a
conversation he had with us^[Conversation with Vercesi.]. He said to us
that:

>"The Italian Party is for the most part made up of new elements,
>without theoretical formation -- political virgins. The old militants
>themselves have for 20 years been isolated, cut off from any developing
>political thoughts. In the present situation the militants are
>incapable of dealing with problems of theory and ideology. Discussion
>can only disturb them and will do more harm than good. For the moment
>they need to walk on solid ground, even if it's made up of old
>positions which are now out of date but which have at least been
>formulated and are comprehensible to them. For the moment it's enough
>to group together those who have a will to act. The solution to the
>great problems raised by the experience between the wars demands the
>calm of reflection. Only a 'great mind' can approach them fruitfully
>and give them the answers they require. General discussion will only
>lead to confusion. Ideological work can't be done by the mass of
>militants, but only by individuals. As long as these brilliant
>individuals haven't arisen, we can't hope to advance ideologically.
>Marx and Lenin were such individuals, such geniuses, in the past. We
>must await the arrival of a new Marx. We in Italy are convinced that
>Bordiga is such a genius. He is now working on a whole series of
>responses to the problems tormenting the militants of the working
>class. When this work appears, the militants will only have to
>assimilate it, and the Party to align its politics and its action with
>these new developments."

This discourse, which we reproduce almost textually, contains three
elements. First, a statement of fact: the low ideological level of Party
members. Secondly, the danger of opening up a broad discussion in the
Party because this will only disturb the members and weaken their
cohesion. And thirdly, that the solution to new political problems can
**only** be the work of a brilliant mind.

On the first point, the comrade is absolutely right: it's an
incontestable fact. But we think that this observation should lead us to
pose the question of the value of this Party. What can such a Party
contribute to the class?

We've seen how Marx defined what distinguished communists from the
proletariat as a whole: their awareness of the general goals of the
movement and of the way to reach them. If the members of the Italian
Party don't exhibit this distinction, if their ideological level doesn't
go beyond that of the proletariat as a whole, can we then really speak
about a Communist Party?

Bordiga correctly indicated the essence of a Party: that it was a "body
of doctrine and a will to action". If this body of doctrine is lacking,
a thousand regroupments won't add up to a Party. In the future, the most
important task of the ICP is the ideological formation of cadres, i.e.
the ideological work needed for it to become a real Party.

This isn't how our ICP leader thinks. On the contrary he considers that
such work will only interfere with the members' will to action. We can
only say that this is a **monstrous** way of thinking. Do we need to
recall the remarkable passages in _What Is To Be Done?_, where Lenin
cites Engels on the necessity for a struggle on three fronts: economic,
political and ideological?

There have always been socialists who have thought that discussion and
the expression of divergences can disturb the proper activities of
militants. One could perhaps call this **narrow-minded socialism**, or
the socialism of ignorance.

Marx fulminated against Weitling, the recognised leader, when he wrote:
"the proletariat doesn't need ignorance." If the struggle of ideas can
trouble the activity of militants, how much more true would this be for
the proletariat as a whole? And that would be the end of socialism,
unless we were to say that socialism is ignorance. This is the
conception of the Church, which is also afraid of worrying the heads of
the faithful with too many doctrinal questions.

Against the idea that militants can only act on the basis of
certainties, even if they are founded on false positions, we insist that
there are no certainties but only a continual process of going beyond
what were formerly truths. Only an activity based on the most recent
developments, on foundations that are constantly being enriched, is
really revolutionary. In contrast, activity based on yesterday's truths
that have already lost their currency is sterile, harmful and
reactionary. One might try to feed the members with absolute certainties
and truths, but only relative truths which contain an antithesis of
doubt can give rise to a revolutionary synthesis.

If doubt and ideological controversy are likely to disturb the activity
of militants, one can't see why this should only be valid today. At each
stage in the struggle, the necessity arises to go beyond the old
positions. At each moment acquired ideas and positions that have been
taken up have to be verified and thrown into doubt. We are thus in a
vicious circle: either we think and don't act, or we act without knowing
whether our action is based on adequate reasoning. This is the fine
conclusion our ICP leader would have to come to if he were to remain
consistent. In any case, this is an idealisation of the "incorrigible
idiot" against whom Lenin couldn't find enough sarcasms. This is the
"perfect cretin" raised to the level of the ideal militant of the
Italian ICP!

All the reasoning of our leader about the 'momentary' impossibility of
theoretical-political research and controversy within the ICP is devoid
of an ounce of justification.

The 'trouble' provoked by such controversies is precisely the condition
for the formation of a militant, the condition for his activity being
based on a conviction that is continually being verified, understood and
enriched. This is the fundamental condition for revolutionary action.
Outside of this there can be only obedience, cretinism and servitude.

But the most intimate thoughts of our leader can be found in the third
point. The theoretical problems of revolutionary action cannot be
resolved through controversies and discussions but through the brilliant
mind of an individual, a leader. The solution isn't the result of
collective work but of thought of an individual isolated in his study,
who finds the basic elements of the solution in his own genius. Once
this work has been done, and the answers have been given, all that
remains is for the man of militants, for the Party as a whole, to
assimilate this solution and bring their political activity into line
with it. This would mean that discussion, if not harmful, would at best
be a useless luxury, a sterile waste of time. And to support this whole
theory we are given, among others, the example of Marx.

Our leader has a funny idea of Karl Marx. Never was a thinker less of a
'man alone in his Study' than Marx. Less than anyone is it possible to
separate Marx the thinker from Marx the man of action, the militant of
the movement. Marx's thought developed not in direct correspondence with
the action of others, but with his own action **and** that of others in
the general movement. Not one idea in his work wasn't drawn from
confrontation with other ideas in the course of his activity. This is
why his work always retained such freshness and vitality. All his work,
even _Capital_, was an incessant controversy, where the most arduous and
abstract theoretical researchers were tightly bound up with discussion
and direct polemic. It's a strange way of seeing Marx's work, describing
it as the product of the miraculous biological composition of his brain!

In general, the role of the genius in human history is over. What did
the genius represent in the past? Simply the fact that the extremely low
level of knowledge of the average man meant that there was an immense
gap between this level and the knowledge held by a few elite elements.
At the lower stage in the development of human knowledge, a very
relative degree of knowledge could be an individual acquisition, just as
the means of production could have an individual character. What
distinguishes the machine as a tool is that it changes the character of
what was formerly the rudimentary product of private labour, turning it
into the complicated product of collective social labour. It's the same
with knowledge in general. As long as it remained on an elementary level
an isolated individual could embrace it in its totality. But with the
development of society and of science, the sum of knowledge could no
longer be held by an individual: only humanity as a whole could do so.
The gap between the genius and the average man diminishes in proportion
to the growth in the sum of human knowledge. Science, like economic
production, tends to be socialised. From the genius humanity has gone to
the isolated scholar, and from the isolated scholar to the team of
scholars. The division of labour tends to increase. To produce anything
today it is necessary to rely on the co-operation of large numbers of
workers. This tendency towards further division exists at the level of
'spiritual' production as well, and it's precisely through this that it
advances.

The scholar's study gives way to the laboratory where teams of scholars
co-operate in their researches, just as the artisan' workshop gives way
to the big factories.

The role of the individual tends to diminish in human society -- not as
a feeling, aware individual but as an individual emerging out of a
confused mass, riding above the chaos of humanity. Man as individual
gives way to social man. The opposition between the individual and
society will be resolved by the synthesis of a society in which all
individuals will find their true personality. The myth of the genius
isn't the future of humanity. It will join the myth of the hero and the
demi-god in the museum of prehistory.

You can think what you like about the diminution of the role of the
individual in human history. You can applaud it or regret it. But you
can't deny it. In order to be able to carry on with its technically
evolved production, capitalism was forced to introduce general
education. The bourgeoisie had to open more and more schools. To the
extent compatible with its interests, it has been obliged to allow the
children of proletarians to enter higher education.

By the same token, the bourgeoisie has had to raise the general level of
culture across society. But it can only do this to a certain degree
before it becomes a threat to its rule; thus the bourgeoisie becomes an
obstacle to the cultural development of society. This is one of the
expressions of the historic contradiction of bourgeois society, which
only socialism can resolve. The development of culture and of
consciousness, in a process that is continually going beyond what has
been acquired, is not only a result of but also a **condition for**
socialism. And now we see a man who calls himself a marxist, who claims
to be a leader of a Communist Party, and who tells us to wait for... a
genius who will bring salvation.

To convince us of all this he recounted this anecdote: after the war he
went to see Bordiga, who he hadn't seen for 20 years, asking him to
comment on certain theoretical and political texts. After reading them
Bordiga found their content to be erroneous and asked him what he
intended to do with them. 'Publish them in the reviews of the Party',
replied our leader. Bordiga's reply was that, since he didn't have the
time to do the theoretical research necessary to refute the content of
these articles, he was opposed to their publication. And if the Party
thought differently he would cease his literary collaboration with it.
Bordiga's threat was sufficient to make our leader renounce his
intention of having these articles published.

This anecdote was supposed to convince us of the greatness of the master
and the pupil's sense of proportion. In fact it has left us with a
painful feeling. If this anecdote is true it gives us an idea of the
reigning spirit in the ICP of Italy, a spirit that is truly lamentable.
Thus it's not the Party, the mass of militants or the working class as a
whole which have the task of judging whether this or that political
position is correct or false. The mass isn't even to be informed. The
'master' is the only judge of what can be understood and taught. So much
for the sublime concern not to 'disturb' the peace and quiet of the
mass. And what if the 'master' is wrong? This cannot be, because if the
'master' is wrong how could a mere mortal judge! But other 'masters'
have been wrong before -- Marx and Lenin included. But this presumably
couldn't happen to our true master today. And if it did, only a future
master could correct him. This is a typically aristocratic conception of
thought. We don't deny the great value that the thought of specialists
and scholars can have. But we reject the monarchist conception of
thought, the idea of Divine Right. As for the 'master' himself, he is no
longer a human being -- he becomes a sort of phoenix, a self-moving
phenomenon, the pure Idea looking for itself, contradicting itself and
grasping itself, as in Hegel.

Awaiting a genius is a proclamation of one's own powerlessness; it's the
crowd waiting at the foot of Mount Sinai for some kind of Moses,
bringing who knows what kind of divinely inspired Bible. It's the old,
eternal awaiting for the Jewish Messiah, coming to liberate his people.
The old revolutionary song of the proletariat, the Internationale, says:
"no saviour on high, no God, no Caesar, no Hero". Now we would have to
add 'no Genius' to cover the particular standpoint of the members of the
ICP.

There are many modern versions of this messianic conception: the
Stalinist cult of the 'infallible leader', the Führer principle of the
Nazis, the blackshirts' ideal of the Duce. They are the expression of
the anguish of the decadent bourgeoisie, becoming vaguely aware of its
approaching end and hoping to save itself by throwing itself at the feet
of the first adventurer to come along. The concept of the genius belongs
to the same family of divinities.

The proletariat has nothing to fear in looking reality in the face,
because the future of the world belongs to it.
