---
title: Theses on the Nature of the State and the Proletarian Revolution
author: Gauche Communiste de France
date: 1946
description: The ICC published this with a lengthy introduction and detailed footnotes. They write that this text was "first published in Internationalisme, no 9 (April 1946). Reprinted in Bulletin d'Etudes et de discussion of RÃ©volution Internationale, no. 1 and first published in English in the ICC pamphlet The period of transition from capitalism to socialism." From <https://en.internationalism.org/internationalreview/201403/9523/aftermath-world-war-two-debates-how-workers-will-hold-power-after-re>.
...

1\. The state appears in history as the expression of antagonistic
interests which divide human society; it is the product and result of
antagonistic economic relations. Although the state has played an
active role in history, it is above all directly determined by the
process of economic development.

It appears to stand above classes but in reality it is the juridical
expression of the dominant economic system; it is the super-structure,
the political dressing of the economic rule of a given class in
society.

The economic relationships between men, the formation of classes, and
the place they occupy in society are determined by the development of
the productive forces at a given moment. The state's only reason for
being is to codify and sanction an already existing economic state of
affairs, to give it a legal force which all members of society are
obliged to accept. Thus, the state seeks to maintain an equilibrium, a
stabilisation of the relations between classes, relations which flow
from the economic process itself. At the same time the state seeks to
prevent any attempt of the suppressed classes to put society into
question by engaging in agitation and disturbances. Thus the state
fulfils an important function in society, ensuring the security and
order indispensable for the maintenance of production. But it can only
do this through its essentially conservative character. In the course
of history, the state has appeared as a CONSERVATIVE and REACTIONARY
factor of the highest order, a fetter which the evolution and
development of the productive forces has constantly had to confront.

2\. In order to fulfil its dual role as an agent of security and an
agent of reaction, the state bases itself on material force, on
violence. Its authority resides in its coercive capacities. It posses
an exclusive monopoly of all the existing forces of violence: police,
army and prisons.

In the struggle between classes, the state, while being the
representative of the ruling class, tends to develop a certain
independence. As the bourgeoisie develops its national formations, its
huge concentrated democratic and political units; as the antagonism
between the classes reaches higher and higher levels; as the rivalry
between the great capitalist states intensifies, the state is forced to
develop its coercive forces to the very limit in order to maintain
order. Internally it forces the proletariat and other labouring classes
to put up with capitalist exploitation while formally and juridically
recognising the freedom of the individual; externally it guarantees the
frontiers of the area of economic exploitation against the greed of
other capitalist groupings and enlarges them at the expense of other
states.

Thus, in the decadent epoch of capitalism when the horizontal and
vertical division of society and the struggles engendered by this
division have reached a culminating point in human history, the state
has also reached a zenith in its development as an organism of coercion
and violence.

Having its origin in the historic necessity for violence (the use of
coercion being the precondition of its growth), the state tends to
resort independently to violence as a means of preserving its own
existence. From being a means, violence becomes an end in itself,
undertaken and cultivated by the state, which thus negates by its very
nature any form of society which goes beyond violence as a way of
regulating relations between men.

3\. In the complexity of the contradictions which blossom and grow with
the development of the capitalist economy, the state is constantly
obliged to involve itself in every area of life: economic, social
cultural, political; in the private life of each individual and in his
relations with society on a local, national or world-wide scale.

In order to cope with its immense social obligations, the state has to
call upon the services of an ever-growing mass of people, removing them
from productive activity and creating a social spectrum apart, with its
own interests, whose speciality and responsibility is the maintenance
of the governmental state machine.

An important section of society (10% and perhaps more) thus constitutes
an independent social stratum (politicians, the judiciary, the police
and the army) with its own economic interests, living parasitically off
society, their exclusive sphere of interest being the state apparatus.

This social stratum, beginning as servants of society in the hands of
the ruling class, tends, because of its size and above all because of
its place in society at the head of the state machinery, to free itself
more and more and to put itself forward as the master of society,
assimilating the ruling class into this tendency. It has an exclusive
monopoly of the public finances, the right to dictate and interpret
laws, and the material force of violence with which to apply these laws
in its own interests.

Thus we can see the emergence of a new privileged social stratum which
derives its material existence from the existence of the state, a
parasitic and essentially reactionary stratum concerned with the
perpetuation of the state, relatively independent, but always
associated with the class whose economic system is based on the
exploitation of man by man and whose main principle is the perpetuation
of human exploitation and the protection of its economic and social
privileges.

4\. The development of technology and of the productive forces can no
longer be imprisoned in the bourgeois principle of the private
ownership of the means of production. Even capitalist production is
obliged to violate the sacrosanct principle of private ownership and
have recourse to the capitalist nationalisation of certain branches of
the economy, such as the railways, the post, and to some extent
aviation, the merchant marine, metallurgy and the mines. State
intervention increasingly makes itself felt throughout the economy and
this is obviously done to safeguard the capitalist system as a whole.
Moreover, in the class struggle between conflicting forces in society,
between classes and economic groupings, the state can only play its
role as a representative, mediating force by supporting itself on a
material, economic, independent, solid base.

In this historic evolution of capitalist society, the state takes on a
new character, a new role -- that of the state as boss. While
maintaining and even accentuating its political functions, the
capitalist state has evolved on the economic terrain towards state
capitalism. Either the state levies part of the surplus-value generated
in the sectors where private ownership of the means of production still
exists, just like any other capital (bank or finance); or it directly
exploits state-owned sectors as a single collective employer in order
to create surplus value. This surplus value is shared out among the
functionaries of the state (except for the part which is capitalised by
being reinvested in production) according to the ranks and privileges
they have obtained.

The economic tendency towards state capitalism, while being unable to
reach complete socialisation and collectivisation within capitalist
society, is nevertheless a very real tendency which, to some extent,
frees the state from playing a strictly instrumental role and gives it
a new economic character as a collective, anonymous employer which
collectively extracts surplus-value.

Although the private ownership of the means of production was the
fundamental basis of the economic system of capitalism and remains so
today, it can, in the final phase of capitalism, undergo profound
modifications without threatening the basic principles of capitalist
economy. Far from signifying the end of the system, the more or less
large-scale statification of the means of production is in perfect
accord with the system and can even be the condition for the system's
survival, providing that the fundamental principle of capitalism still
exists: that is to say the extraction of surplus value from the working
class for the benefit of a powerful and privileged minority. The
fundamental opposition between the capitalist economy and the socialist
economy does not therefore reside in the private possession of the
means of production. While socialism is incompatible with the private
ownership of the means of production, the absence of private ownership
(although an indispensable precondition for the creation of a socialist
economy) is by no means in itself identical to socialism, since reality
has demonstrated how capitalism can accommodate itself to the
statification of the means of production by moving towards state
capitalism.

The fundamental opposition between the capitalist economy and socialism
is to be found:

1. in the motive force and aim of production. Under capitalism this is
the quest for a greater and greater amount of surplus value; the aim of
socialism, on the other hand, is the satisfaction of the needs of
society and its members;

2. in the fact that under capitalism, in the immediate redistribution
of the products and values created, a smaller and smaller fraction of
the values created are given over to consumption, the largest part
being reinvested in order to expand production. Under socialism an
increasing proportion of the values created is immediately consumed by
the producers. That part of the values produced which is directly
consumable must tend to increase in relation to the part which is
invested in production in order to contribute to the process of
reproduction.

Thus, far from representing any weakening of capitalist society, the
state's growing tendency towards economic and political independence
merely serves to transform the economic power of capitalism to the
state by elevating the latter until it becomes the real seat of power
in capitalism. In reaction to the proletariat and its historic mission
of creating a socialist society, the capitalist state takes on the
appearance of a Goliath. By its very nature the state represents the
whole past history of humanity, of all the exploiting classes and
reactionary forces in history. Its very character, as we have shown,
being one of CONSERVATISM, VIOLENCE, BUREAUCRACY, THE DEFENCE OF
PRIVILEGES AND OF ECONOMIC EXPLOITATION, it is the incarnation of the
principle of oppression and is irreconcilably opposed to the principle
of liberation, incarnated by the proletariat and socialism.

5\. Up until now all new classes have simply substituted their
domination and privileges for that of other classes; the economic
development of the new class unfolded slowly and over a long period
prior to the establishment of its political hegemony. Because their
economic interests (which coincided with the development of the
productive forces) were the interests of a minority, of a single class,
their power developed within the old society, first of all on the
economic level. It is only after reaching a certain degree of economic
development, after economically supplanting or partially absorbing the
old ruling class, that the political power, i.e. the state and the
juridical system, came to sanctify the new state of affairs. The
bourgeoisie developed its economic domination over a long period,
strengthening the power of merchant capital. It was only when the
bourgeoisie had achieved its economic domination over the old feudal
society that it carried out its political revolution. The bourgeois
revolution had to break the resistance of feudalism and its ideological
superstructure because feudal law had became a fetter on the
development of the productive forces; but it did not destroy the state.
Because the underlying principle of the state is the defence of
exploitation of man by man, the bourgeoisie merely had to seize hold of
the state machine and continue to use it in its own class interests.
The revolutionary process in previous class societies was, thus, as
follows:

a. the economic rise and strengthening of the new class within the old
society;

b. its economic domination, a peaceful economic revolution;

c. a violent political revolution sanctifying the economic state of
affairs;

d. the maintaining of the state apparatus in order to use it in the
interests of the new class;

e. the gradual absorption of the old ruling classes who live on within
the new ruling class.

6\. However, unlike the other classes in history, the proletariat does
not possess any wealth, any instrument of labour, any material
property. It cannot build any economic system inside capitalist
society. Its position as a revolutionary class resides in the objective
evolution of society, which makes the existence of private property
incompatible with the development of the productive forces, makes the
continued production of surplus value an impossibility. Capitalist
society is faced with an insufficient market for the realisation of the
surplus value it creates. The objective necessity for a socialist
society, insofar as socialism is the dialectical solution to the
internal contradictions of the capitalist system, finds in the
proletariat the only class whose interests coincide with the needs of
historical evolution. This last class in history, possessing nothing,
having no privileges to defend, complies with the historic necessity
for the suppression of all privileges. The proletariat is the only
class which can carry out this revolutionary task of suppressing every
privilege, all private property, of liberating the productive forces
from their capitalist fetters and developing them in the interests of
humanity. The proletariat does not and cannot have any economic policy
inside the capitalist system.

The proletariat has no class economy to set up before or after the
revolution. In contrast to other classes, and for the first time in
history, the revolution of the proletariat begins as a political
revolution which precedes and creates the conditions for a
social-economic transformation. The economic liberation of the
proletariat is an economic liberation from the fetters of all class
interests; it is the disappearance of all classes. The proletariat
liberates itself by liberating the whole of humanity, by dissolving
itself into the latter.

The state, the incarnation of class rule and economic oppression,
cannot be conquered by the proletariat in the classic sense. On the
contrary, the first step towards the proletariat's emancipation is the
revolutionary destruction of the state. Not having any economic power,
nor any economic property, the proletariat draws its strength from the
consciousness which it acquires from the objective historical laws of
the economic process. Its strength lies exclusively in its
CONSCIOUSNESS and its capacity for ORGANISATION. The class party, which
crystallises the consciousness of the class, represents the
indispensable precondition for the realisation of the proletariat's
historic mission, just as its unitary organs of struggle represent its
practical material capacity for action.

Because other classes in history had economic power in society, they
could more or less do without a party; they were themselves hardly
conscious of where their actions were leading and they identified
themselves with the state, the incarnation of privilege and oppression.
But at every moment of its activity as a class, the proletariat comes
up against the state -- the proletariat is the historical antithesis of
the state.

The conquest of the state by an EXPLOITING class in a given country
marked the end of an historical process and was the last revolutionary
act of that class. THE DESTRUCTION OF THE STATE by the proletariat is
simply THE FIRST REVOLUTIONARY ACT OF THE CLASS, which opens the way
for the proletariat and its party towards a whole revolutionary
process, leading at first to the WORLD REVOLUTION and then on the
economic terrain to the creation of a SOCIALIST SOCIETY.

7\. There is a great historical gulf between, on the one hand, the level
attained by the productive forces, which have entered into conflict
with the capitalist system, and which have to go beyond the framework
of that system and, on the other hand, the level of development
necessary for the advent of socialist society, for the full
satisfaction of the needs of everyone in society. This gulf cannot be
wiped out by a simple programmatic declaration, as the anarchists
believe, but must be bridged on the economic terrain by an economic
policy, the economic policy of the proletariat. This is why theory
posits the inevitability of a historic period of transition between
capitalism and socialism -- a transition period in which political
power, and not economic power, is in the hands of the revolutionary
class. This is the dictatorship of the proletariat.

The development of the economic foundations of socialism is the
political task of the proletariat and its party and cannot be
undertaken on a national terrain, but only on a world-wide scale.
Capitalism is a world system. The world domination of capital ensures
that the economic development of the different sectors of the world
economy and of different branches of industry can only take place
within the limits imposed by the interests of capital.

In other words, the development of different sectors and branches of
the world economy is being severely handicapped. Socialism, on the
other hand, is based on a very high economic development of all sectors
of the world economy. The liberation of the productive forces from
their capitalist fetters by the proletarian revolution is, therefore,
the first precondition for the economic evolution of society towards
socialism.

The economic policy of the proletariat develops on the basis of the
generalisation of the revolution onto the world scale; its content
resides not in a one-sided affirmation of the development of
production, but essentially in the establishment of a harmonious rhythm
between the development of production and a proportional rise in the
living standards of the producers.

The period of transition expresses an economic continuity with the
pre-socialist epoch in the sense that it cannot yet satisfy all the
needs of society and contains within it the necessity of continuing
accumulation. But any policy which bases itself on the maximum
accumulation in order to expand production has no proletarian content
and is simply the continuation of the capitalist economy. There
economic policy of the proletariat, therefore, is based on a necessary
accumulation which is compatible with, and conditioned by, the
improvement of the workers' living standards, with a relative and
progressive increase in variable capital.

After its victory over the bourgeoisie, the proletariat on the one hand
becomes the politically dominant class, which with its class party
assures its class dictatorship throughout the period of transition in
order to lead society towards socialism; on the other hand, the
proletariat remains a class in production which has particular
immediate economic interests to defend and it must, therefore, continue
to make these interests prevail through its own economic organisations
-- the unions -- and its own methods of struggle -- the strike --
throughout the period of transition.

8\. The revolutionary destruction of the capitalist state, the
instrument of class domination, does not mean that the economic power
of the enemy class has been destroyed or that it has disappeared. The
expropriation and socialisation of the key sectors of production are
the first, indispensable measures of the proletariat's economic policy.
The existence of backward sectors of the economy, particularly in
agriculture, does not permit an immediate transition to a socialist
economy or a total abolition of private property. Socialism cannot be
built by mere decrees; it is the fruit of a long economic process in
which the methods of socialism have to combat and defeat the methods of
capitalism on an economic terrain.

The existence of these backward economic sectors, the inevitable
survival of private property, represents a real danger: the soil of
economic conservatism, of the consolidation and regeneration of those
social forces which stand in the way of the movement towards socialism.

The period of transition is a period of bitter struggle between
capitalism and socialism; in this struggle the proletariat will have
the advantage of having won political power but this is not an
automatic guarantee of its final victory.

The outcome of the struggle, the guarantee of the proletariat's final
victory resides exclusively in the strength of consciousness in the
class and its ability to translate this consciousness into practical
politics.

Any political mistake, any tactical error, will strengthen the position
of the class enemy. The elimination of the political formations of the
class enemy, of its organisations and press, is an indispensable
measure for breaking its resistance. But this is not enough. The
proletariat must above all safeguard the independence of its own class
organisations, preventing them from being deformed by taking up tasks
and functions which do not correspond to their real nature. The party,
which represents the consciousness of the historic mission of the class
and of its final goal, exercises the dictatorship in the name of the
proletariat; the trade union, the unitary organ of the class which
expresses its economic position and which has to defend the immediate
interests of the class, must not identify with the state or become
integrated into it.

9\. The state, insofar as it is reconstituted after the revolution,
expresses the immaturity of the conditions for a socialist society. It
is the political superstructure of an economic base which is not yet
socialist. By its nature it is opposed to and hostile towards
socialism. Just as the period of transition is an historically
inevitable stage which the proletariat has to go through, so the state
is for the proletariat an unavoidable instrument of violence which it
must use against the dispossessed classes, but with which it cannot
identify itself. "AND THE LEAST ONE CAN SAY IS THAT THE STATE IS A
NECESSARY EVIL WHICH IS INHERITED BY THE PROLETARIAT IN ITS STRUGGLE
FOR CLASS DOMINATION" (Engels, Preface to The Civil War in France).

As a social institution, the state set up after the victory of the
proletarian insurrection remains alien and hostile to socialism.

Expropriation and nationalisation, the problems of managing the
economy, the historic unpreparedness of the labouring classes and the
proletariat to direct the economy, the need to have recourse to
technical specialists, to men who come out of the ranks of the
exploiting classes and their servants, the disastrous state of the
economy following the civil war, all these are historical factors which
will tend to strengthen the state machine and its fundamental
characteristics of conservatism and coercion. The historic necessity
for the proletariat to make use of the state must not lead to the fatal
theoretical and political error of identifying this instrument with
socialism. The state, like a prison, is not a symbol of socialism, nor
of the class whose mission is to create it: the proletariat.

The dictatorship of the proletariat, expressing the will of the
revolutionary class to crush the resistance of the enemy and to ensure
the movement towards a socialist society, also expresses its
fundamental opposition to the idea of the proletarian nature of the
state, the error of identifying the dictatorship of the proletariat
with the utilisation by the proletariat of this instrument of coercion,
the state.

10\. When the proletariat becomes master of society through the victory
of the revolution against the bourgeoisie, it will be faced with a
social situation which is not yet ripe for socialism but which can only
attain this ripeness under the proletariat's leadership. In every
sphere -- economic, political, cultural, social -- the proletariat will
inherit remnants of nations and all kinds of backward superstructures,
institutions and ideologies which the proletariat cannot abolish by a
simple act of will. It will have to take them into account, to fight
against them, to attenuate their most pernicious effects. Violence is
not the essential means for doing this; it can only be used strictly in
proportion to the violence used by the class enemy in order to crush
him. Violence must absolutely and categorically be rejected in the
relations between the proletariat and other labouring classes, and
within itself. In a general way, the methods used to move towards
socialism are closely related to the goal that is being sought after,
in other words, to socialism itself.

In the beginning of the transition period, the proletariat will be
forced to make use of instruments bequeathed to it by the whole past
history of violence and class rule. The state is such an instrument; it
is the very symbol of violence, plunder and oppression. The proletariat
inherits this instrument and can only use it on the condition that:

1. it recognises and proclaims the anti-socialist nature of the state
and at no time identifies itself with it; it must constantly stand
against the state with its own class organs, the party and the unions,
ensuring that the state is under the perpetual vigilance and control of
the whole class;

2. it attenuates the pernicious effects of the state as far as
possible, as in the Paris Commune (Engels, Preface to _The Civil War in
France_).

The Russian experience has amply vindicated Marx and Engels' warnings
concerning the dangers of the state and the need to take measures
against these dangers.

These measures include: the working masses electing representatives who
are revocable at any time; destruction of any armed force separate from
the people and its replacement by the general armament of the
proletariat and the toiling classes; the widest possible democracy for
the working class and its organisations; vigilant and permanent control
by the whole class over the functioning of the state; state
functionaries to be paid no more than a workman's wage. Such measures
must cease to be mere formulae; they must be carried out to the letter
and strengthened as far as possible by complementary social and
political measures.

History and the Russian experience, in particular, have demonstrated
that there is no such thing as a proletarian state as such, but only a
state in the hands of the proletariat, a state whose nature remains
anti-socialist. If the political vigilance of the proletariat weakens,
the state will become the stronghold, the rallying point and the
expression of the dispossessed classes of a re-born capitalism.

## The trade unions after the revolution

11\. The trade unions, unitary organs for the defence of the
proletariat's economic interests, have their origins in the mechanisms
of production. They arise out of the necessity for the proletariat to
struggle against economic exploitation, against the extraction of an
ever-growing mass of surplus value, i.e. an increase in unpaid
labour-time.

By increasing productivity the development of technology diminishes the
labour-time necessary for the reproduction of labour power. Under
capitalism greater productivity does not tend to reduce labour-time nor
create a proportional amelioration of the workers' living standards. On
the contrary, the capitalists' search for greater productivity is
carried out purely and simply to increase the production of surplus
value.

The conflict between capital and labour, constant capital and variable
capital, capitalism and the proletariat, is centred round an economic
problem; the role of the two forces in production is based on a
fundamental antagonism which gives rise to a continuous class struggle.
In this struggle against capitalism, the proletariat organises for the
defence of its immediate interests through an association of all those
who are exploited: the trade union.

However much the trade unions have come under the influence of the
agents of the bourgeoisie, i.e. the reformist bureaucracy, whose
policies sabotage and deflect the role of the unions, they remain
organs of the class as long as they maintain their independence from
the capitalist state.

12\. The proletarian revolution will not immediately do away with
classes and with relations of production between different classes. The
victorious revolution is simply "the organisation of the proletariat as
the ruling class" which through its party opens up an historic path, an
economic tendency which begins from the existence of classes and of
exploitation and ends up in a classless society.

This period of transition between capitalism and socialism under the
political dictatorship of the proletariat expresses itself on the
economic terrain in an energetic policy which aims to diminish class
exploitation, to constantly increase the proletariat's share of the
national income, to alter the relationship between variable and
constant capital in favour of the former. This policy cannot simply be
based on programmatic declarations of the party; still less is it the
prerogative of the state, the organ of coercion and of management. This
policy can only find a guarantee and a real expression in the working
class itself, through the pressure which the class exerts over society,
through its opposition to, and struggle against, all other classes.

Trade union organisation under capitalism represents a tendency towards
the regroupment of the class against exploitation, which is constantly
being held back and blocked by the influence and repression of the
ruling bourgeoisie. It is only after the revolution that the trade
union organisations will really become the unitary organs of the class,
regrouping all the workers without exception. Only then will the unions
really be able to undertake the defence of the proletariat's immediate
economic interests.

13\. The role of trade union organisations after the revolution does not
derive simply from the fact that they are the only organisations that
can undertake the defence of the proletariat's immediate interests,
even though this in itself is enough justification for complete freedom
and independence for the trade unions and for the rejection of any
subordination or integration of the unions into the state. But more
than this, the trade union organisations are an extremely sensitive
living barometer which can quickly show whether the main trend in
society is towards socialism (through the proportional increase of
variable capital) or towards capitalism (through a much larger
proportional growth of constant capital). When there is any oscillation
in economic administration towards capitalist policies (as a result of
economic pressures which come from immature conditions and from
surviving non-proletarian classes), the proletariat, by means of its
independent union and its specific struggles, will have to react and
intervene thereby providing a social counterweight which will push
economic policy back onto a socialist path.

To give trade unions the role of managing the economy will not
eliminate the essential problems that arise out of this economic
situation. This would not solve the difficulties which are engendered
by a real lack of maturity in the economy, but such a role would
deprive the proletariat and its organisations of their freedom. It
would destroy the proletariat's capacity to exert the pressure
necessary both for the defence of its immediate interests and for
guaranteeing a socialist policy for the economy.

14\. Under capitalism, the trade unions provide a very imperfect
reflection of the level of class consciousness. This consciousness can
only be fully acquired by the proletariat after the revolution when it
is free from all the shackles imposed on it by the bourgeoisie and its
agents, the reformist leaders.

After the revolution, the trade unions will reflect much more clearly
the level of consciousness that the whole class has reached and will
provide a milieu for the political education of the masses. Communists
draw their inspiration from the conception that the defence of the
revolution and the building of socialism cannot be achieved by the will
of a small elite, but finds its strength only in the political maturity
of the proletarian masses. Violence exerted against the proletarian
masses, even if it aims at guaranteeing progress towards socialism, can
in no way provide such a guarantee.

Socialism cannot be a rape of the proletariat, created against its
will. Socialism can only be based on the consciousness and will of the
working class. Communists reject all methods of violence within the
proletariat because such methods stand in the way of any movement
towards socialism, because they obstruct the class from attaining an
understanding of its historic mission. Within the unions communists
will fight for full freedom of expression and political criticism. It
is among the proletariat organised in the unions that communists will
fight for their political positions, against all the tendencies which
reflect the persistence of bourgeois and petty bourgeois influences
within the proletariat and within certain backward strata of the class.
Freedom for fractions and tendencies within the unions, freedom of
speech and of the press for all the currents inside the unions: these
are the conditions which will enable the class party to recognise and
evaluate the level of consciousness in the masses, to guarantee the
movement towards socialism through the political education of the
masses, to verify its own policies and correct them when necessary.

The relationship between party and class is simply the relationship
between the party and the unions.

15\. Any tendency to reduce the role of the trade unions after the
revolution; any pretence that the existence of a 'workers' state' means
the end of freedom to engage in union activity or strikes; any advocacy
of fusing the unions with the state through the theory of handing
economic administration over to the unions, which seems revolutionary
but which in fact leads to an incorporation of the unions into the
state machine; any position which, however revolutionary in its
intentions, calls for violence within the proletariat and its
organisations; any attempt to stand in the way of the broadest workers'
democracy and the free-play of political struggle and of fractions
within the unions: any such policies are anti-working class. They
falsify the relationship between party and class and weaken the
proletariat's position during the transition period. The duty of
communists will be to energetically denounce and fight against all
these tendencies and to work for the full development and independence
of the trade union movement, which is an indispensable condition for
the victory of socialism.

## Management of the economy

16\. The management of the economy after the civil war is the most
difficult and complex problem which the proletariat and its party will
have to face. It would be puerile to try to provide a priori solutions
to all the practical aspects of this problem. It would transform
marxism into a system of rigid precepts, valid and applicable at any
time regardless of the various concrete and circumstantial situations
which could arise in different countries and sectors of the economy.

It is only through practical study that we will be able to find the
necessary solutions to any situation that may arise. Following Marx and
Engels, we can today only give a broad outline, provide the general
principles of economic management during the transitional period,
basing ourselves mainly on the experience of the Russian revolution.

17\. The achievement of socialism demands a very advanced development of
technology and of the productive forces. Following the victory of the
revolution, the proletariat will not have a fully developed technology
at its disposal. This is not because the revolution is premature; on
the contrary, the development of the productive forces has reached its
limit under capitalism. This fact justifies the assertion that the
objective conditions for revolution are present. Capitalism has become
a fetter on the development of the productive forces and must be
destroyed. It is up to the proletariat to conduct a policy which will
allow a full development of the productive forces so that socialism can
become an economic reality.

The development of technology and of the productive forces is the basis
of the economic policy of the proletariat. This requires an
accumulation of part of the values produced in order to improve,
intensify and ensure an expanded reproduction. But socialism is not
simply a result of the speed with which the productive forces develop;
the rhythm of the movement towards socialism will be subordinated to,
and limited to, the concrete possibilities given by the real economic
and political situation.

18\. The management of the economy can at no time be separated from the
development of the political struggle of the class, and this means on
an international scale. A revolution that is victorious in one country
cannot simply seek to develop its own economy, independently from the
struggle of the proletariat in other countries. The Russian revolution
has given us historic proof of the fact that the attempt to develop the
economy in Russia outside of an ascendant movement of the revolution in
other countries led Russia into a policy of compromises with world
capitalism, a policy of external pacts and economic agreements and
internal concessions. These compromises turned out to be just so many
ways of economically propping up a capitalist system in open crisis,
saving it from collapsing. But at the same time, these compromises had
a deeply disturbing effect on a proletariat which was in the throes of
a revolutionary struggle (the secret Rapallo Treaty of 1922 between the
Soviet state and German militarism, for example).

The economic agreements which were aimed simply at achieving a partial
strengthening of the country of the revolution in fact led to a
political and economic reinforcement of capitalism, an overturn in the
balance of class forces in favour of capitalism. Thus the country of
the victorious revolution accentuated its isolation and lost its only
ally, the only guarantee of its ultimate development: the international
revolution. It ended up as a political and economic force diverted by
the growing pressure of its historic enemy and was reabsorbed into the
capitalist system.

The economic policy of the proletariat in one country cannot aim at the
resolution of that country's economic difficulties or the overcoming of
underdevelopment within the narrow framework of one country. The future
of that economy is indissolubly linked and directly subordinated to the
development of the international revolution. Any internal economic
policy must be of a provisional character and essentially aimed at
helping the international revolution.

19\. The Russian experience has also shown that the attempt to
accelerate the rhythm of production beyond a proportionate development
of consumption will lead to the production of goods destined for
destruction. This is in line with the general tendency of world
capitalism in its decadent phase which can only ensure the continuation
of production by setting up a war economy.

Against this policy of speeding up industrial development as much as
possible, of sacrificing the immediate interests of the proletariat in
order to build a war economy, a genuine proletarian economic policy
will be based on a rate of growth which is proportionate to the
consumption requirements of the producers, and will therefore aim at
the production of consumer goods immediately necessary for the
satisfaction of workers' needs.

Accumulation will not be based on the criterion of developing industry
as quickly as possible, but will be fixed at a rate which is compatible
with the progressive satisfaction of immediate needs. The fundamental
principles of economic management will be the production of basic
necessities, and the gradual harmonisation of the various branches of
production, particularly between town and country, industry and
agriculture.

20\. As long as the productive forces have not reached a level of
development which can do away with small-scale production in every
branch of the economy, there can be no question of the complete and
immediate disappearance of intermediary classes, of the artisans and
small peasants.

After the revolution the proletariat will only be able to collectivise
the developed and concentrated sectors of industry, the key industries:
transport, banking, big landed property. It will expropriate the big
bourgeoisie. But small private property will continue to exist and will
only be abolished through a long economic process. Alongside the
socialist sector of the economy there will still be a private sector of
small producers. The economic relations between these sectors will
probably take many forms, from socialist relations to co-operative ones
and to the free exchange of commodities between the state and the
small-holders and even between the individual, isolated producers
themselves. Problems of production, of exchange prices, markets and
money will also take many different forms. The economic policy of the
proletariat will have to take this situation into account, rejecting
bureaucratic violence as a way of regulating economic life and basing
itself solely on the real possibilities of absorbing private production
through the development of technology. It will aim at the elimination
of private property and the isolated producer through the incorporation
of these strata into the great family of the proletariat.

21\. The management of economic and social life requires a centralised
organism. The theory which would give each group of producers the task
of managing their own enterprises is a reactionary petty bourgeois
utopia. The development of technology requires the participation of the
great mass of the workers, their cooperation in the productive process.

Production in each branch of the economy is linked to the whole of
national and international production. It calls for the setting in
motion of immense forces and for systematic planning, and only a
centralised administration can ensure this. Otherwise one would have to
transform each member and group of society into so many small
proprietors, each with their own antagonistic interests, which would
mean a return to the epoch of simple commodity production long since
wiped out from history by the development of industry. Socialist
society will engender its own organs of social and economic
administration. In the period of transition, the function of economic
management can only be undertaken by the political power which emerges
from the revolution and which, under the control of the entire working
population, will manage and direct the economy.

The broadest, most effective and most direct participation of all the
workers at every level of the new power will be the only way of
ensuring that the economy is under the management of the workers
themselves. The Paris Commune gave us the first example of this new
kind of state, while the Russian revolution reaffirmed this first
attempt and gave it its definitive form in the organs of representation
of all the workers at their workplace and in their localities: the
councils or soviets.

22\. Everyone who works will participate in the elections to organs of
direction and management. Only those who do not work or who live off
the labour of others will be excluded. The interests of all the working
masses will be expressed in the councils, including those of the
non-proletarian strata. The proletariat, because of its consciousness,
its political strength, the place it occupies at the industrial heart
of the economy, because of its concentration in the towns and
factories, having acquired a sense of organisation and discipline, will
play a preponderant role in the whole life and activity of the councils
and will give leadership and direction to the other strata of the
labouring population.

In the councils, the proletarians will for the first time learn the art
of administering society for themselves. The party will not impose its
economic policies on the councils through decrees or by claiming some
divine right. It will have to make its conceptions and policies prevail
by proposing them, defending them, and submitting them to the approval
of the masses organised in the councils or soviets, relying on the
councils of workers and on the workers' delegates to the central
councils to bring its class policies to a successful conclusion.

23\. Just as the relationship between party and class is expressed
through the trade unions, so the relationship the proletariat and its
party have with other labouring classes is expressed through the
councils or soviets. Just as violence within the class can only falsify
its relationship with the party, so there must be a rejection of
violence in the relations between the proletariat and the other
labouring classes and strata. These relations must be based on full
freedom of expression and criticism within the councils of workers' and
peasants' delegates.

In a general sense, violence as a method of activity in the hands of
the proletariat will be indispensable for destroying the rule of
capitalism and its state, and for guaranteeing the victory of the
proletariat against the resistance and violence of the
counter-revolutionary classes during the civil war. But apart from
this, violence can play no part in the constructive task of building
socialism. On the contrary, it contains the risk of deviating the
proletariat's activity, of falsifying its relationship with other
labouring strata, and of distorting its capacity to find class
solutions to the problems which confront it, solutions which can only
be based on the development of the political maturity of the masses.
