---
title: The Perspective of Communism
author: International Communist Current
description: This was a four-part series that the ICC published in the 1970s, possibly in both _World Revolution_ and _Revolution Internationale_. It was republished with some prefaces in 2004 in _World Revolution_. The series is available online at <https://en.internationalism.org/series/336>.
date: 2004
...

## Perspective of Communism, part 1: Why communism is necessary and possible

### 2004 Preface

In the movement of the working class against the attacks of capitalism,
the specific role of revolutionaries is not just to insist on the need
for workers to take control of their struggles and spread them as widely
as possible; it is also to show that the day-to-day struggles of our
class are the preparation for an ultimate confrontation with this
system, aimed at dismantling it and replacing it with a radically new
society.

We are not talking here about the 'alternative worlds' proposed by the
'anti-globalisation' movement; as we show in our article on the European
Social Forum, these are not really an alternative at all, but a slightly
modified version of present-day capitalism. We are talking about
communism.

Ah, but 'communism is dead' we are told: it died when the Berlin Wall
fell and the Stalinist regimes of the east collapsed. At best, the
argument goes, the idea of communism is 'utopian', impossible, contrary
to human nature, a daydream of mad fanatics. And indeed, for the vast
majority of workers -- even those engaged in bitter struggles against
the system -- communism is also no more than a nice idea, good in theory
but unworkable in practice.

And we reply: the claim that communism died in 1989 is a lie -- the
deceitful propaganda of the ruling class. **Because the Stalinist
regimes had nothing to do with communism and were capitalist from top to
bottom**. The demise of these regimes was not the death of communism,
but the end of a particular form of capitalist domination.

With the republication of this series written in the 1970s^[See _World
Revolution_ 25, 26, 28; the series is also available on our website.],
we intend not only to show what communism really means, but also to show
that far from being a failed dream, communism is both **possible** and
absolutely **necessary**, the only real solution to the insoluble
contradictions of capitalism in decay.

### Introduction

The idea of a society in which misery, oppression, social inequalities
and private property no longer exist is not new. Solidarity would be the
basis of all human interaction in this society, where men would no
longer respond to each other like vicious animals. The blossoming of
liberty for each would be the condition governing the flowering of
liberty for all. In differing forms, this idea crops up even in the
earliest writings of Antiquity. The Greek philosopher Plato wrote of it
(while simultaneously defending slavery!), as did the first Christians.
Later, in the Middle Ages, it reappeared, most notably in the
conceptions of the Millenarian movements, but also in the writings of
the German monk Thomas MÃ¼nzer, one of the leaders of the Peasant Wars.

### The historic limits of capitalism

However, communist conceptions were not fundamentally developed until
such time as a new class -- the proletariat -- made its first appearance
in society. For the first time in history, a class existed which carried
within itself the real possibility of transforming the old dream into
reality. As early as the seventeenth century in England and the
eighteenth in France, political currents grew up within the bourgeois
revolutions taking place at that time and proclaimed the communist
project in more or less explicit terms. Thus, even while the proletariat
was not a fully formed class in society, it nonetheless created
organisations like the 'True Levellers' in England and the Equals in
France to defend its historic interests. But it was not until the middle
of the nineteenth century, with the growth and concentration of the
working class accompanying the development of large-scale industry, that
the communist movement was able to make precise its own objectives and
the means to attain them. This entailed a break with past utopian
conceptions, best-expressed in the work of Fourier, Saint-Simon and
Owen, and the distancing of the movement from the sectarian,
conspiratorial activity of Blanqui and his cohorts. Religious references
which had permeated the movement previously, and which even influenced
as lucid a communist as Weitling, were swept aside in 1847 with the
appearance of the first rigorous, scientific formulation of communism.
The _Communist Manifesto_ provided the theoretical basis for all the
later developments in understanding of the proletarian movement. In this
document, communism is not presented as the invention of a few
visionaries that merely awaits application, but is seen as the only
society which can succeed capitalism and overcome its mortal
contradictions. The essential argument contained in the _Manifesto_ is
that capitalism, like all societies before it, cannot go on forever. If
it did at one point represent a progressive step in the development of
humanity, notably by unifying the world through the creation of a world
market, capitalism today is wracked with insurmountable contradictions.
These plunge the system into ever more violent convulsions which will
end in it being swept away. By causing an immense development in the
productive forces of society, and most important among them the working
class itself, capitalism has brought into being the conditions necessary
for its own transcendence and the creation of a society based on
abundance. The working class is the subject of the social transformation
of capitalism, and situated as it is on the lowest rung of the social
ladder, it cannot emancipate itself without emancipating the whole of
humanity.

### Decadence of capitalism and perspective of communism

Although the _Communist Manifesto_ was mistaken in its conception that
capitalism had already reached the limits of its own development and the
communist revolution was, therefore, imminent -- a mistake which its
authors Marx and Engels recognised some years later -- nonetheless its
essential understanding of the unfolding of capitalist development has
subsequently been amply confirmed. This is particularly true with regard
to the idea that capitalism cannot escape from its own economic crises,
which become successively more violent.

Today, once again, the economic crisis imposes on society an aberration
typical of capitalism. Hundreds of thousands of individuals are plunged
into the most terrible misery, not because production is insufficient to
meet their needs, but because production is too great. However, today's
crisis is of a different type than the crises analysed in the
_Manifesto_. The crises of the last century appeared in a period of full
capitalist expansion; the system could 'solve' its crises at that time
by eliminating the least profitable sectors of the economy in
conjunction with its conquest of new markets. The crises of the
nineteenth century constituted the heartbeat of a vigorous social
organism. But since the first world war capitalism has entered into its
phase of historical decline; of permanent crisis. From that time on, no
real solution to the crisis has been possible within capitalism. The
system can only continue to exist on the basis of an infernal cycle in
which increasingly acute crises are followed by war, reconstruction and
further crisis. As the Communist International announced in 1919, the
era of imperialist wars and revolutions had arrived and communism was on
the historical agenda. Since then, the successive convulsions suffered
by humanity have confirmed, each time more forcibly, the urgent need for
humanity to go beyond the capitalist mode of production which now
severely hampers any further human development.

After the first world war, the crisis of 1929 provided another
spectacular illustration of the bankruptcy of capitalism. In its wake,
the holocaust of the second world war demonstrated that the scope of
capitalist barbarism could exceed even the unbelievable horror of the
first world butchery. Since capitalism has entered into its phase of
decadence, humanity has paid the monstrous price of over 100 million
deaths to keep this system functioning; and that is not counting the
terrible human losses caused by unnecessary famine, malnutrition and
general misery which capitalism forces millions of human beings to
endure.

Today's crisis is not the first indication of capitalism's bankruptcy,
nor the first proof of the need to replace it with communism. In many
domains the crisis merely reflects in a clearer light contradictions
which have torn the system apart in the past. But to the extent that a
startling discrepancy exists between the enormous possibilities this
system possesses to satisfy human needs, and the catastrophic usage to
which capitalist production is actually put, the necessity for another
type of society makes itself felt today in a way which is even more
imperative than it was in the past.

The new society which will succeed capitalism must be able to overcome
the contradictions which plague society today. This is the only way that
such a society can function as a definite objective necessity and not as
a utopian construction of the human mind. Its characteristics must be in
complete opposition to the negative laws underpinning the development of
capitalist society.

The root cause for the evils which ruin capitalism resides in the fact
that the aim of capitalist production is not to satisfy human needs but
to accumulate capital. Capitalist production does not produce use values
but exchange values. Private appropriation of the means of production
thus comes into conflict with their increasingly social character. In
other words, capitalism decomposes because it produces for a market
which is itself more and more restricted since it is based on an
exploitation of wage labour. The surplus value produced by the
exploitation of the working class can no longer be realised, i.e. be
exchanged for goods which can enter into an enlarged cycle of capitalist
reproduction.

### The basis of communist society

The economic character of communism must, therefore, be the following:

1. The only incentive governing production will be the satisfaction of
   human needs.
2. The goods which society produces will cease to be commodities;
   exchange-value will disappear and only use value will remain.
3. The present restricted framework hampering the process of production
   will become more and more socialised. Private ownership of the means
   of production, whether possessed on an individual basis as in
   laissez-faire capitalism or by the state as in decadent capitalism,
   will give way to the socialisation of the means of production. This
   will mean the end of all private property; the end of the existence
   of social classes and thus the end of all exploitation.

One objection is often raised against this conception of society. It
questions why such a society has not already come into existence since
it would contain all the characteristics most appropriate to human
development and would most closely constitute an ideal form of society.
In other words, why should this form of society be a possibility today
when it hasn't been possible to create a society like this in the past?
In their reply to questions like these the anarchists usually answer, as
all the utopians answered before them, that in fact communism has always
been possible. Since objective material conditions don't stand in the
way of communism, all that is needed is sufficient human will. What the
anarchists can't explain is why human will hasn't been strong enough in
the past to create communism and why the will to create communism, which
did exist within minority groupings, didn't extend itself throughout
society in the past.

Marxism, however, gives a serious answer to these questions. It explains
why one of the essential conditions for the evolution of humanity is the
development of the productive forces, or in other words the productivity
of human labour. Each level of development of the productive forces of a
particular society corresponds to a given type of productive
relationship. The relations of production are the relations established
between men and women in their activity of producing goods destined to
satisfy their needs. In primitive societies the productivity of labour
was so low that it scarcely satisfied the barest physical needs of the
members of the community. Exploitation and economic inequality were
impossible in such a situation: if certain individuals had appropriated
to themselves or consumed goods in greater quantities than other members
of this society, then the poorer off would not have been able to survive
at all. Exploitation, generally in the form of slavery established as
the result of the territorial conquest of one tribe by another, could
not appear until the average level of human production had gone beyond
the basic minimum needed for physical survival. But between the
satisfaction of this basic minimum and the full satisfaction, not only
of the material but also the intellectual needs of humanity, there
exists an entire range of development in the productivity of labour. By
means of such development, mankind steadily became the master of nature.
In historical terms, it was this period which separated the dissolution
of primitive communist society from the era when fully developed
communism would be possible. Just as mankind wasn't naturally 'good' in
those ages when men and women weren't exploited under the conditions of
primitive communism, so it hasn't been naturally 'bad' in the epochs of
exploitation which have followed. The exploitation of man by man and the
existence of economic privilege became possible when average human
production exceeded the physical minimum needed for human life to
reproduce itself. Both became necessary because the level of human
production could not fully satisfy all the needs of all the members of
society.

As long as that was the case, communism was impossible, whatever
objections the anarchists may raise to the contrary. But it is exactly
this situation which capitalism has itself radically modified, owing to
the enormous increase in the productivity of labour which it has brought
into being. Capitalism methodically exploited every scientific
discovery, generalised associated labour, and put to use the natural and
human riches of the entire world. But obviously the increase in the
productivity of labour set in motion by capitalism was paid for by an
intensification of exploitation on a scale unknown in human history.
However, such a profound increase in human productivity does represent
the material basis for a communist society. By making itself the master
of nature, capitalism created the conditions by which humanity may
become master of itself.

### Humanity's future at stake

The capitalist crisis today is an excellent demonstration of the
necessity for communism. For the first time in the history of humanity,
a society plunges the greater part of its members into the most acute
misery, not because it cannot produce enough, but because it produces
too much in relation to the laws which govern how it regulates
production.

Before the rise of capitalism humanity knew crises, but never crises of
overproduction. Today this congenital evil of the capitalist system
reveals itself with unequalled violence: unemployment increases
relentlessly, underemployment spreads throughout the productive process,
more and more murderous and extensive wars break out. All of these
things prove that the real utopians are those people who imagine it is
possible today to achieve a greater satisfaction of human needs through
the reform of capitalism, and not its complete overthrow. The whole
gamut of economic, political and military events which have shaken the
world over the last decades bear testimony to the fact that humanity, if
it remains bound by the laws of capitalism, will find itself moving down
the road towards a third world holocaust. The magnitude of that war
would make the other two appear almost inconsequential.

While the unbelievable destructive power of past inter-imperialist
conflicts has demonstrated that mankind can master nature, and therefore
that communism is possible, it has also shown that mankind's mastery
over nature can also be used to destroy humanity itself. Thus, communism
becomes a necessity today, not only to ensure the further progress of
the human species, but more simply to ensure that humanity survives at
all.

In the next article in this series we will examine various objections
raised against the viability of communism, mainly those that argue that
humanity is 'naturally' incapable of realising such a society.

## Perspective of Communism, part 2: Is communism against human nature?

### 2004 preface

In the first part of this series, we saw that communism is not merely an
old dream of humanity, or the simple product of human will, but is the
only form of society which can overcome the contradictions strangling
the capitalist system. After developing the productive forces to an
unprecedented degree and having constructed a world economy, capitalism
then entered into its era of decadence. The permanent barbarism of this
era has made communism a necessity not only for the further progress of
humanity but even for its simple survival. Thus, contrary to those who
announced the 'death of communism' when the Stalinist regimes of the
east collapsed, it is impossible to reform capitalism or make it more
human.

In this second part, we are going to look at those who tell us that a
communist society as envisaged by Marx and others is in any case
impossible to realise because the characteristic features of capitalism,
such as egoism, lust for wealth and power, the war of each against all,
are actually unchangeable expressions of 'human nature'.

### Human nature

'Human nature' is a bit like the Philosophers' Stone for which the
alchemists searched for centuries. Up till now, all significant studies
of 'social invariants' (as the sociologists would have it) -- i.e.
characteristics of human behaviour which are the same in all societies
-- have ended up showing the extent to which human psychology and
attitudes are variable and linked to the social framework in which the
individual develops. In fact, if we wanted to point to a fundamental
characteristic of this 'human nature', to the feature which
distinguishes man from other animals, we would have to point out the
enormous importance of 'acquired' as opposed to the 'innate'; to the
decisive role played by education, by the social environment in which
human beings grow up.

>"The operations carried out by a spider resemble those of a weaver, and
>many a human architect is put to shame by the bee in the construction
>of its wax cells. However, the poorest architect is categorically
>distinguished from the best of bees by the fact that before he builds a
>cell in wax, he has built it in his head" (Marx, _Capital_ Vol. 1).

The bee is genetically programmed to build perfect hexagons, and it's
the same with the homing pigeon which can find its home at a distance of
hundreds of miles, or with the squirrel storing up nuts. On the other
hand, the final form of the structure conceived by our architect is not
so much determined by a genetic inheritance as by a whole series of
elements provided by the society in which he/she lives. Whether we're
talking about the kind of structure we have been told to build, the
materials and tools that can be used, the productive techniques and the
skills that can be applied, the scientific knowledge and artistic canons
that guide us -- all of this is determined by the social milieu.

Apart from that, the part played in all of this by 'innate'
characteristics transmitted genetically to the architect by the parents
can be essentially reduced to the fact that the fruit of their union
wasn't a bee or a pigeon, but a human being like themselves: i.e. an
individual belonging to an animal species in which the 'acquired'
element is by far the most important factor in the development of the
adult.

It's the same with behaviour as it is with the products of labour. Thus
theft is a 'crime', a perturbation in the functioning of society which
would become catastrophic if it became generalised. One who steals, or
who threatens, abducts or kills people with the aim of stealing, is a
'criminal', and will almost unanimously be considered as a harmful,
anti-social element who must be 'prevented from doing harm' (unless of
course he does this stealing within the framework of the existing laws,
in which case the skill in extorting surplus value from the proletariat
will be praised and generously rewarded, just as generals skilled in
mass murder are awarded medals). But the behaviour known as 'stealing',
and criminals who 'steal', 'murder', etc, as well as everything to do
with them -- laws, judges, policemen, prisons, detective films, crime
novels -- would any of this exist if there was nothing to steal? If the
abundance made possible by the development of the productive forces was
at the free disposition of every member of society? Obviously not! And
we could give many more examples showing just how much behaviour,
attitudes, feelings, and relations between human beings are determined
by the social milieu.

The peevish-minded will object to this by saying that if asocial
behaviour exists, no matter what form it takes, in different forms of
society, it's because at the root of 'human nature' there's an
anti-social element, an element of aggressiveness against others, of
'potential criminality'. They will argue that, very often, people don't
steal out of material necessity; that gratuitous crime exists; that if
the Nazis could commit such atrocities, it's because there's something
evil in Man, which comes to the surface in certain conditions. In fact
such objections only show that there's no human nature which is 'good'
or 'bad' in itself; Man is a social animal whose numerous potentialities
take on different expressions depending on the conditions that are lived
in. Statistics speak eloquently on this question: is it 'human nature'
which gets worse during periods of crisis in society, when we see a
growth in criminality and all kinds of morbid behaviour? On the
contrary, isn't the development of 'asocial' attitudes among an
increasing number of individuals the expression of the fact that the
existing society is becoming more and more incapable of satisfying human
needs -- needs which are eminently social and which can no longer be
satisfied in a system which is less and less functioning as a society, a
community?

The same peevish spirits base their rejection of the possibility of
communism on the following argument: 'You talk about a society which
will really satisfy human needs, but the desire for property and power
over others are themselves essential human needs, and communism, which
excludes them, is therefore unable to satisfy human needs. Communism is
impossible because man is egoistic.'

In her 'Introduction to Political Economy' Rosa Luxemburg described the
reaction of the British bourgeoisie when, in the cause of conquering
India, they came across peoples who had no private property. They
consoled themselves by saying that these people were 'savages', but it
was still rather embarrassing for people who had been taught that
private property was something 'natural' to conclude that it was
precisely these 'savages' who had the most 'artificial' way of living!
In reality, humanity has such a 'natural need for private property' that
it did without it for over a million years. And in many cases it was
only after bloody massacres, as in the case of the Indians described by
Rosa Luxemburg, that they were instilled with this 'natural need'. It's
the same with commerce, that 'unique, natural' form of the circulation
of goods, the natives' ignorance of which so scandalised the
colonialists. Inseparable from private property, it arose with it and
will disappear with it.

There's also the idea that if there was no profit to stimulate the
development of production, if the individual effort of the worker wasn't
recompensed by a wage, no one would produce anything anymore. True
enough, no one would produce in a capitalist way anymore; i.e. in a
system based on profit and wage labour, where the slightest scientific
discovery has to be financially viable, where work is a curse to the
overwhelming majority of workers, on account of its length, its
intensity, and its inhuman form. On the other hand, does the scientist
who, through his research, participates in the progress of technology,
always need a material stimulant to work? Generally they're paid less
than the sales executive who makes no contribution to the advancement of
knowledge. Is manual labour necessarily disagreeable? If so, why do
people talk about the 'love of craftsmanship', why is there such a craze
for 'do-it-yourself' and all sorts of manual activities which are often
very expensive? In fact, when labour isn't alienated, absurd,
exhausting, when its products no longer become forces hostile to the
workers, but serve to really satisfy the needs of the collective then
labour will become a prime human need, one of the essential forms of the
flourishing of human potential. In communist society, human beings will
produce for pleasure.

### The need for power

Because leaders and authority-figures exist today, it's generally
concluded that no society can do without leaders, that men and women
will never be able to live without submitting to authority and exerting
it on others.

We won't repeat here what marxism has always said about the role of
political institutions, about the nature of state power. It can be
summarised in the idea that the existence of political authority, of the
power of some people over others, is the result of the existence within
society of conflicts and confrontations between groups of individuals
(social classes) which have antagonistic interests.

A society in which people compete with each other, in which they have
opposing interests, in which productive labour is a curse, in which
coercion is a permanent fact of life, in which the most elementary human
needs are crushed underfoot for the great majority -- such a society
'needs' leaders, just as it needs policemen and religion. But once all
these aberrations have been suppressed, we'll soon see whether leaders
and power will still be necessary. Our sceptic will respond: 'but men
need to dominate others or be dominated. Whatever kind of society you
have, there will still be the power of some people over others.' It's
true that a slave who has always had his feet in chains may have the
impression that there is no other way of walking, but a free person will
never have this impression. In communist society, free men and women
won't be like the frogs in the fairytale who wanted to have a king. The
'need' that people may have to exercise power over others is the
flip-side of what could be called the 'slave mentality': a significant
example of this is the cringing, obedient army adjutant who's always
barking orders at his 'inferiors'. If people feel a need to exert power
over others, it's because they have no power over their own lives and
over the running of society as a whole. The will to power in each person
is the measure of their own impotence. In a society in which human
beings are no longer the impotent slaves of either natural or economic
laws, a society in which they have freed themselves from the latter and
are consciously able to use the former for their own purposes, a society
in which they are 'masters without slaves', they will no longer need
that wretched substitute for power -- the domination of others.

It's the same with aggressiveness as with the so-called 'lust for
power'. Faced with the permanent aggression of a society which grinds
them into the dirt, plunges them into perpetual anguish and represses
all their most basic desires, individuals are necessarily aggressive.
This is no more than the survival instinct, which exists in all animals.
Some psychologists consider that aggression is an inherent compulsion in
all animal species and will therefore express itself in all
circumstances. But even if this is the case, let's give humanity the
chance to use this aggression to combat the material obstacles which
stand in the way of our own development -- then we'll see whether
there's a real need to exert aggression against other people.

### Man's egoism

'Everyone for themselves' is supposed to be a basic human
characteristic. It's undoubtedly a characteristic of bourgeois humanity
with its ideal of the 'self-made man', but this is simply the
ideological expression of the economic reality of capitalism and has
nothing to do with 'human nature'. Otherwise one would have to say that
'human nature' has been radically transformed since primitive communism,
or even since feudalism with its village communities. In fact
individualism massively entered the world of ideas when small
independent owners appeared in the countryside (when serfdom was
abolished) and in the towns. Made up of small owners who had been
successful -- mainly by ruining their rivals -- the bourgeoisie was a
fanatical adherent of this ideology and saw it as a fact of nature. For
example, it had no scruples about using Darwin's theory of evolution to
justify the social 'struggle for survival', the war of all against all.

But with the appearance of the proletariat, the associated class par
excellence, a breach was opened in the domination of individualism. For
the working class, solidarity is the elementary precondition for
defending its material interests. At this level of reasoning, we can
already reply to those who claim that human beings are 'naturally
egoistic'. If they are egoistic they are also intelligent, and the
simple desire to defend their interests pushes them towards association
and solidarity as soon as the social conditions allow it. But this isn't
all: in this social being par excellence, solidarity and altruism are
essential needs in more ways than one. People need the solidarity of
others, but they also need to show solidarity to others. This is
something which can be seen even in a society as alienated as ours,
expressed in the seemingly banal idea that 'everyone needs to feel
useful to others'. Some will argue that altruism is also a form of
egoism because those that practise it do it above all for their own
pleasure. Fair enough -- but that's just another way of putting forward
the idea defended by communists that there is no essential opposition --
on the contrary -- between individual interest and collective interest.
The opposition between individual and society is an expression of
societies of exploitation, societies based on private property (i.e.
private to others), and all this is very logical -- how could there be a
harmony between those who suffer from oppression and the very
institutions that guarantee and perpetuate this oppression? In such a
society, altruism can only appear in the form of charity or of
sacrifice, i.e. the negation of others or the negation of oneself; it
does not appear as the affirmation, the common and complementary
flowering of the self and others.

Contrary to what the bourgeoisie would like us to believe, communism is
not, therefore, the negation of individuality. It is capitalism, which
reduces the worker to an appendage of the machine, which negates
individuality; and this negation of the individual has reached its most
extreme limits under the specific form of capitalism in decay: state
capitalism. In communism, in a society which has got rid of that enemy
of freedom par excellence -- the state, which will have no reason for
existing -- each member of society will be living in the reign of
freedom. Because humanity can only realise its innumerable
potentialities in a social way, and because the antagonisms between
individual interest and collective interest will have disappeared, new
and immense vistas will be opened up for the flowering of each
individual.

Similarly, far from accentuating the dreary uniformity that has been
generalised by capitalism, as the bourgeoisie claims, communism is above
all a society of diversity, because it will break down the division of
labour which fixes each individual in a single role for the rest of
their life. In communism, each new step forward in knowledge or
technology won't lead to an even higher level of specialisation, but
will serve to expand the field of activities through which each
individual can develop. As Marx and Engels put it:

>"... as soon as the distribution of labour comes into being, each man
>has a particular, exclusive sphere of activity, which is forced upon
>him and from which he cannot escape. He is a hunter, a fisherman, a
>herdsman, or a critical critic, and must remain so if he does not want
>to lose his means of livelihood; while in communist society, where
>nobody has one exclusive sphere of activity but each can become
>accomplished in any branch he wishes, society regulates the general
>production and thus makes it possible for one to do one thing today and
>another tomorrow, to hunt in the morning, fish in the afternoon, rear
>cattle in the evening, criticise after dinner, just as I have a mind,
>without ever becoming hunter, fisherman, herdsman or critic" (_The
>German Ideology_).

Whatever the bourgeoisie and all the sceptical and peevish-minded may
say, communism is made for humanity; human beings can live in such a
society and make such a society live!

There remains an argument to deal with: 'OK, communism is necessary and
materially possible. Yes, men and women could live in such a society.
But today humanity is so alienated under capitalist society that it will
never have the strength to undertake a transformation as gigantic as the
communist revolution.' We'll try to answer this in the next part of the
article.

## Perspective of Communism, part 3: Why the proletariat is a communist class

### 2004 preface

In the first two parts of this article (see _World Revolution_ 271 and
272) we established, first of all, that communism isn't simply an old
dream of humanity or the mere product of human will, but that the
necessity and possibility of communism were based directly on the
material conditions developed by capitalism; secondly, that against all
the prejudices about 'human nature' making it impossible for humanity to
live in such a society, communism really is the kind of society that is
most able to allow each individual to flourish to the full. We still
have to deal with another question against the possibility of communism:
'OK, communism is necessary and materially possible. Yes, men and women
could live in such a society. But today humanity is so alienated under
capitalist society that it will never have the strength to undertake a
transformation as gigantic as the communist revolution.' We'll try to
answer this now.

### Is communism inevitable?

Before dealing directly with the question of the concrete possibility of
the transition from capitalism to communism, we have to be clear about
the idea that communism is certain and inevitable.

A revolutionary like Bordiga could once write: "The communist revolution
is as certain as if it had already happened." This really is a distorted
view of marxism. While it can draw out certain laws about the
development of societies, marxism resolutely rejects any idea of a kind
of human destiny, written in advance in the great book of nature. Just
as the evolution of the species doesn't involve any finality, i.e. it's
not a movement of progressive approximation towards some kind of perfect
model, so the evolution of human societies isn't moving towards a model
established in advance. Such a vision belongs to idealism: it was the
philosopher Hegel, for example, who considered that each form of society
was a progressive step towards the realisation of an 'Absolute Ideal'
hovering above men and history. Similarly, the Jesuit Teilhard de
Chardin thought that man is evolving towards a 'Point Omega' which has
been fixed for all time. While the study of history can enable us to
grasp the general laws of social evolution in relation to the
development of the productive forces, it also tells us that history is
full of examples of societies which have hardly evolved at all;
societies which, far from giving rise to more progressive forms of
social development, have either stagnated for thousands of years, like
the Asiatic societies, or have simply decayed on their feet, like
ancient Greek society. As a general rule, the mere fact that a whole
society has entered into decadence in no way means that it contains
within itself the basis for a higher social form; it can just as easily
collapse into barbarism and lose most of the cultural acquisitions and
productive techniques which had determined and accompanied its former
development.

It's a very particular kind of society, capitalism, which developed on
the ruins of the feudal society of western Europe, and which has created
on a world-scale (being the most dynamic form of society that has ever
existed) the material conditions for communism. But capitalism, like
many other societies, is not immune from the danger of total decay and
decomposition, of annihilating all the advances it has made and dragging
humanity several centuries or several thousand years backwards. In
practical terms, it's not hard to see that this system has created the
means for the self-destruction of all human society, precisely because
it has extended its domination across the whole planet and has reached
such a level of technical mastery. As we've already seen, the conditions
which make communism possible and necessary are also the conditions
which threaten humanity with irreversible decline or total destruction.

Revolutionaries are not charlatans; they don't go about announcing the
inevitable advent of a golden age which we have only to wait for
quietly. Their role isn't to preach sermons of consolation to humanity
in distress. But while they can have no certainty about the inevitable
coming of communism (it's precisely because they're not certain that
they dedicate their lives to the struggle to make what is possible
become a reality), they must insist on the real possibility of such a
society -- not only on the level of material possibilities or of the
theoretical capacity of human beings to live in such a society, but also
as regards the capacity of humanity to make this decisive leap from
capitalism to communism, to make the communist revolution.

### The subject of the communist revolution

Because of the failure of past revolutions, whether they were crushed
like those in Germany and Hungary in 1919, or whether they degenerated
as in Russia, the average bourgeois draws the conclusion that the
revolution is impossible. He has a grim warning for all who want to
embark on such ventures: "Woe betide you if you try to revolt! And if
you ever do, look what happened in Russia!" It's quite understandable
that the bourgeoisie should think like this: it's in line with its
interests as a privileged, exploiting class. And this doesn't mean that
the bourgeoisie itself isn't alienated. On the contrary, as Marx and
Engels wrote:

>"The propertied class and the class of the proletariat present the same
>human self-estrangement. But the former class feels at ease and
>strengthened in this self-estrangement as its own power and has in it
>the semblance of a human existence. The latter feels annihilated in
>estrangement; it sees in it its own powerlessness and the reality of an
>inhuman existence" (Marx, _The Holy Family_).

But, however ferocious their exploitation, however inhuman their living
conditions over the past fifty years, workers have been impressed by
such arguments, to the point of virtually giving up any hope of
emancipating themselves. This despair has allowed all sorts of theories
to blossom, notably those of Professor Marcuse^[Marcuse was a 1960s guru
of student and third world radicalism.], according to which the working
class is no longer a revolutionary class, is integrated into the system,
so that the only hope for the revolution lies with the marginal strata,
those who are excluded from present-day society like 'the young',
'blacks', 'women', 'students' or the peoples of the Third World. Others
arrived at the idea that the revolution would be the work of a
'universal class' regrouping nearly everyone in society.

What actually lies behind all these theories about the 'integration' of
the working class is a petty-bourgeois disdain for the class (hence the
success of these theories in the milieu of the intellectual and student
petty bourgeoisie). For the bourgeois and petty bourgeois that follow in
his footsteps, the workers are nothing but poor sods that lack the will
or intelligence to make anything of their lives. They spend the whole of
their lives being brutalised: instead of breaking out of their
conditions they fritter away all their leisure-time in the pub or stuck
in front of the TV, the only thing that arouses their interest being the
Cup Final or the latest scandal. And, when they do demand something,
it's just a measly wage rise so that they can be even more alienated by
the 'consumer society'.

After the patent failure or recuperation of the marginal movements that
were supposed to overturn the established order, it's understandable
that those who held such theories should now be giving up any
perspective of changing society. The most astute of them are now
becoming 'new philosophers' or officials of the social democratic
parties; the less well provided for are drifting into scepticism,
demoralisation, drugs or suicide. Once one has understood that it won't
come from 'all men of good will' (as the Christians believe), or from
the universal class (as _Invariance_^[_Invariance_ was a group that came
out of Bordigism in the 1970s and evolved towards the idea of a
universal class that would make the revolution instead of the
proletariat.] believes), or from the much-vaunted marginal strata, or
from the peasants of the Third World as Maoism and Guevarism claim, then
one can see that the only hope for the regeneration of society lies with
the working class. And it's because they have a static vision of the
working class, seeing it as a mere collection of individual workers,
that the sceptics of today don't think that the working class is capable
of making the revolution.

As early as 1845, Marx and Engels replied to these kinds of objections:

>"It is not a question of what this or that proletarian, or even the
>proletariat as a whole, may imagine for the moment to be the aim. It is
>a question of what the proletariat actually is and what it will be
>compelled to do historically as the result of this being" (_The Holy
>Family_).

If you consider that the working class will never be anything but a sum
of what its members are today, then no, the revolution will never be
possible. But such a viewpoint makes an abstraction of two fundamental
aspects of reality:

* The whole is always more than the sum of its parts;
* Reality is movement. The elements of nature are not immutable and the
  elements of human societies even less so. That's why one must avoid
  taking a photograph of the present situation and thinking that this is
  an eternal reality. On the contrary one must grasp what exactly is
  this "historic being" of the proletariat which pushes it towards
  communism.

### Exploited class and revolutionary class

Marx and Engels tried to answer this question in _The Holy Family_:

>"When socialist writers ascribe this world-historic role to the
>proletariat, it is not at all, as Critical Criticism pretends to
>believe, because they regard the proletariat as gods. Rather the
>contrary. Since in the fully-formed proletariat the abstraction of all
>humanity, even of the semblance of humanity, is practically complete;
>since the conditions of life of the proletariat sum up all the
>conditions of life of society today in their most inhuman form; since
>man has lost himself in the proletariat, yet at the same time has not
>only gained theoretical consciousness of that loss, but through urgent,
>no longer removable, no longer disguisable, absolutely imperative need
>-- the practical expression of necessity -- is driven directly to
>revolt against this inhumanity, it follows that the proletariat can and
>must emancipate itself" (_The Holy Family_).

However this answer is still insufficient. This description of
capitalist society can also be applied to all class societies; this
description of the working class can be applied to all exploited
classes. This passage explains why, like all other exploited classes,
the proletariat is compelled to revolt, but it doesn't say why this
revolt can and must lead to revolution i.e. the overthrow of one kind of
society and its replacement by another: in short, why the working class
is a revolutionary class.

As sceptics of all kinds are prone to point out, it's not enough for a
class to be exploited for it to be revolutionary. And in fact, in the
past, the opposite has been the case. In their day, the nobility
fighting against slave society and the bourgeoisie fighting against
feudalism were revolutionary classes. This didn't make them exploited:
on the contrary, they were both exploiting classes. On the other hand,
the revolts of the exploited classes in these societies -- slaves and
serfs -- never resulted in a revolution. A revolutionary class is a
class whose domination over society is in accordance with the
establishment and extension of the new relations of production made
necessary by the development of the productive forces, to the detriment
of the old, obsolescent relations of production.

Because both slave society and feudal society could only give rise to
another exploitative society -- due to the level of the development of
the productive forces in those periods -- the revolution could only be
led:

* by an exploiting class;
* by a class which wasn't specific to the declining society, while those
  classes who **were** couldn't be revolutionary, either because they
  were exploited or because they had privileges to defend.

In contrast, since capitalism has developed the conditions which make
the elimination of all exploitation both possible and necessary, the
revolution against it can only be made:

* by an exploited class;
* by a class which is specific to capitalist society.

The proletariat is the only class in present day society which meets
these two criteria; it's the only revolutionary class in present-day
society. Thus we can now respond to the central objection which this
article set out to deal with. Yes, the proletariat is an alienated
class, subjected to the whole weight of the ruling bourgeois ideology;
but because it produces the bulk of social wealth and is thus more and
more shouldering the burdens of the capitalist crisis, it's going to be
compelled to revolt. And in contrast to the revolts of previous
exploited classes, the revolt of the proletariat isn't a desperate one:
it contains within itself the possibility of revolution and communism.

The objection can be raised that there have been attempts at a
proletarian revolution but that they have all failed. But just as the
fact that the plague decimated society for centuries didn't mean that
humanity would have to suffer this scourge for ever, so the failure of
past revolutions shouldn't lead us to the conclusion that the revolution
is impossible. The main thing which held back the revolutionary wave of
1917-23 was the fact that the proletariat's consciousness lagged behind
its material existence: although its old conditions of struggle had
become obsolete once capitalism had passed from its zenith to its
decadent phase, the class didn't become aware of this in time. It thus
went through a terrible counter-revolution which silenced it for
decades.

Once again, we don't pretend that victory is certain. But even if there
is only a chance in a thousand that we're going to win, the stakes
involved in today's struggles are so momentous that, far from
demoralising us, this should galvanize the energies of all those who
sincerely aspire to a different kind of society. Far from despising,
ignoring or underestimating the present struggle of the working class,
we must understand the decisive importance of these battles. Because the
proletariat is both an exploited class and a revolutionary class, its
struggles against the effects of exploitation prepare the way for the
abolition of exploitation; its struggles against the effects of the
crisis prepare the way for the destruction of a society in mortal
crisis; and the unity and consciousness forged during these struggles
are the point of departure for the unity and consciousness which will
enable the proletariat to overthrow capitalism and create a communist
society.

## Perspective of Communism, part 4: How the proletariat organises itself to overthrow capitalism

In the previous articles in this series, we have seen:

* why today communism is both a necessity not only to ensure the
  blossoming of humanity but also its simple survival;
* why, for the first time in history, this is no longer a simple dream,
  but that mankind has at his disposal the material conditions for
  taking this immense step forward;
* why man is really capable of living in such a society and making it
  work;
* why, despite all the alienation that weighs upon the consciousness of
  man, there exists a class in society, the proletariat, capable of
  transforming its struggle against exploitation and oppression into a
  struggle for the establishment of a new order that will abolish
  exploitation, oppression and all divisions into classes.

In the present article, we are continuing this examination of the
perspective of communism by looking at how the proletariat can organise
itself to make the revolution.

For a long time revolutionaries, along with the proletariat as a whole,
have groped for an answer to the question: how will the workers organise
themselves to make the revolution? In earlier times (from Babeuf to
Blanqui) small conspiratorial sects were in favour. Subsequently,
different workers' societies, such as trade unions or co-operatives,
like those gathered inside the International Workers' Association (First
International founded in 1864) seemed to represent this
self-organisation of the working class with a view to its emancipation.
Then the great mass parties assembled in the Second International
(1889-1914), and the unions attached to them, presented themselves as
the lever for transforming society. But history shows that if these
forms of organisation corresponded to stages of development in the
capacity of the working class to struggle against exploitation, and to
become conscious of the goals of this struggle, none of them were
appropriate for the actual accomplishment of its historic task: the
destruction of capitalism and the establishment of communism. It is when
the historic conditions of capitalism itself put the proletarian
revolution on the agenda that the working class found a suitable form of
organisation to carry it out: the workers' councils. Their appearance in
Russia in 1905 signified a turning point in the history of capitalist
society: the end of its progressive epoch, its entry into decadence,
into "the era of imperialist wars and proletarian revolutions" as
revolutionaries subsequently understood it. Similarly, if since Blanqui
revolutionaries understood the necessity for the establishment of the
dictatorship of the proletariat as a lever for the transformation of
society, the concrete form that this dictatorship would take only became
clear with the experience of the class itself, and even then with some
delay. Falling into step with the old conceptions of Marx and Engels,
Trotsky, who nevertheless played a decisive role at the head of the
Soviet (workers' council) of Petrograd, could still write in 1906,
twenty-five years after 1871: "International socialism considers that
the republic is the only form possible for the socialist emancipation,
on the condition that the proletariat tears it from the hands of the
bourgeoisie and transforms it, 'from a machine for the oppression of one
class by another' into an arm for the socialist emancipation of
humanity".

### The workers' councils, the form of the dictatorship of the proletariat

Thus, for a long time, a 'real democratic republic' in which the
proletarian party would play the leading role was seen as the shape and
form of the dictatorship of the proletariat. It's only with the
revolution of 1917 in Russia that revolutionaries, and in particular
Lenin, understood clearly that the "finally found form" of the
dictatorship of the proletariat is nothing other than the power of the
workers' councils, these organs which appeared spontaneously from 1905
during the course of the revolutionary struggle and which were
characterised by:

* their formation on the basis of general workers' assemblies;
* the election and revocability at any time of the delegates;
* the unity between the taking of decisions and their application
  (non-separation between 'legislative' and 'executive');
* regroupment and centralisation not on the basis of industry or trade
  but on a territorial basis (thus it's not print workers who come
  together as in the unions, but all the workers of a firm, a town, a
  region, etc., who elect delegates to the workers' council of that
  area).

This specific form of organisation of the working class is directly
adapted to the tasks which await the proletariat in the revolution.

In the first place, this is a general organisation of the class,
regrouping all of the workers. Previously, all forms of organisation,
including the unions, only regrouped a part of the class. While that was
enough for the working class to exert pressure on capitalism in order to
defend its interests within the system, it is only through
self-organisation in its totality that the class is able to carry out
the destruction of the capitalist system and establish communism. For
the bourgeoisie to make its revolution, it was enough for a part of this
class to take power; this is because it only constituted a small part of
the population, because it was an exploiting class, and because only a
minority of the bourgeoisie itself could raise itself above the
conflicts of interests generated by the economic rivalries between its
various sectors. On the other hand, such rivalries don't exist within
the working class. At the same time, because the society that it is
called upon to establish abolishes all exploitation and all division
into classes, the movement that it leads is "that of the immense
majority for the benefit of the immense majority" (_Communist
Manifesto_). Therefore only the self-organisation of the class as a
whole is up to accomplishing its historic task.

In the second place, the election and instant revocability of different
officers expresses the eminently dynamic character of the revolutionary
process -- the perpetual overturning of social conditions and the
constant development of class consciousness. In such a process, those
who have been nominated for such and such a task, or because their level
of understanding corresponds to a given level of consciousness in the
class, are no longer necessarily up to speed when new tasks arise or
when this level of consciousness evolves.

Election and revocability of delegates equally expresses the rejection
by the class of all definitive specialisation, of all division within
itself between masses and 'leaders'. The essential function of the
latter (the most advanced elements of the class) is in fact to do
everything they can to eliminate the conditions that provoked their
appearance: the heterogeneity of consciousness within the class.

If permanent officials could exist in the unions, even when they were
still organs of the working class, it was due to the fact that these
organs for the defence of workers' interests within capitalist society
bore certain characteristics of this society. Similarly, when it used
specifically bourgeois instruments such as universal suffrage and
parliament, the proletariat reproduced within itself certain traits of
its bourgeois enemy as it cohabited with it. The static union form of
organisation expressed the method of struggle of the working class when
the revolution was not yet possible. The dynamic form of workers'
councils is in the image of the task that is finally on the order of the
day: the communist revolution.

Similarly, the unity between taking a decision and applying it expresses
this same rejection by the revolutionary class of all institutionalised
specialisation. It shows that it is the whole of the class that not only
takes the essential decisions that concern it, but also participates in
the practical transformation of society.

In the third place, organisation on a territorial basis and no longer
trade or industrial expresses the different nature of the proletariat's
tasks. When it was solely a question of putting pressure on an
employer's association for an increase in wages or for better working
conditions, organisation by trade or by industrial branch made sense.
Even an organisation as archaic as the craft-based trade union was
efficiently used by the workers against exploitation; in particular, it
prevented the bosses calling in other workers of the trade when there
was a strike. The solidarity between printers, cigar makers or bronze
gilders was the embryo of real class solidarity, a stage in the
unification of the working class. Even with the weight of capitalist
distinctions and divisions upon it, the union organisation was a real
means of struggle within the system. On the other hand, when it was a
question not of standing up to this or that sector of capitalism, but of
confronting it in its totality, of destroying it and establishing
another society, the specific organisation of printers or of rubber
industry workers could make no sense. In order to take charge of the
whole of society, it is only on the territorial basis that the working
class can organise itself, even if the base assemblies are held at the
level of a factory, office, hospital or industrial estate.

Such a tendency already exists at the present time in the immediate
struggle against exploitation. Here again there is a profound tendency
to break out of the union form and to organise in sovereign general
assemblies, to form elected and revocable strike committees, to spill
over professional or industrial boundaries and to extend at the
territorial level.

This tendency expresses the fact that, in its period of decadence,
capitalism takes on a more and more statified form. In these conditions,
the old distinction between political struggles (which were the
prerogative of the workers' parties in the past) and economic struggles
(for which the unions had responsibility) makes less and less sense.
Every serious economic struggle becomes political and confronts the
state: either its police, or its representatives in the factory -- the
unions. This also indicates the profound significance of the present
struggles as preparations for the decisive confrontations of the
revolutionary period. Even if it is an economic factor (crisis,
intolerable aggravation of exploitation) which hurls the workers into
these confrontations, the tasks which are subsequently presented to them
are eminently political: frontal and armed attack against the bourgeois
state, establishment of the dictatorship of the proletariat.

### The proletarian revolution: political power as a basis for social transformation

This unity between politics and economics expressed by the organisation
of the proletariat into workers' councils requires some elucidation.
Which aspect is primary?

Communists since Babeuf have recognised that, in the proletarian
revolution, the political aspect precedes and conditions the economic.
That is a schema completely opposed to the one that prevailed in the
bourgeois revolution. The capitalist economy developed inside feudal
society, in the chinks of the latter one could say. The new
revolutionary class, the bourgeoisie, could thus conquer economic power
in society while the political and administrative structures were still
linked to feudalism (absolute monarchy, economic and political
privileges of the nobility, etc.). It is only when the capitalist mode
of production became dominant, when it was conditioning the whole of
economic life (including those sectors which weren't directly
capitalist, such as small scale agricultural and craft production), that
the bourgeoisie launched its assault on the political power. This in
turn enabled it to adapt the latter to its specific needs and lay the
ground for a new economic expansion. This is what it did, notably with
the English revolution of the 1640s and the French revolution of 1789.
In this sense the bourgeois revolution completed a whole period of
transition during the course of which it developed inside feudal
society, until it came to the point of supplanting it on the basis of a
new economic organisation of society. The schema of the proletarian
revolution is quite another thing. In capitalist society, the working
class possesses no property, no established material springboard for its
future domination of society. All the attempts inspired by utopian or
Proudhonist conceptions have failed: the proletariat cannot create
'islands' of communism in present-day society. All the workers'
communities or cooperatives have either been destroyed or recuperated by
capitalism. Babeuf, Blanqui and Marx understood this against the
utopians, Proudhon and the anarchists. The taking of political power by
the proletariat is the point of departure of its revolution, the lever
with which it will progressively transform the economic life of society
with the perspective of abolishing all economy. It is for that reason
that, as Marx wrote: "Without revolution, socialism cannot be realised.
It needs this political act, inasmuch as it needs destruction and
dissolution. But here its organising activity begins and here its own
aim emerges; its soul, socialism rejects its political envelope"
(_Poverty of Philosophy_).

Inasmuch as capitalism had already created its economic base at the time
of the bourgeois revolution, the latter was essentially political. The
revolution of the proletariat, on the contrary, begins with a political
act that conditions the development not only of its economic aspects,
but also above all of its social aspects.

Thus, the workers' councils are in no way organs of 'self-management',
organs for the management of the capitalist economy (i.e., of misery).
They are political organs whose primary tasks are to destroy the
capitalist state and establish the proletarian dictatorship on a world
scale. But they are also organs for the economic and social
transformation of society, and this aspect makes itself felt from the
very start of the revolutionary process (expropriation of the
bourgeoisie, organisation of essential supplies for the population etc).
With the political defeat of the bourgeoisie, the economic and social
dimension will more and more come into its own.
