---
title: "Islamic Fundamentalism: Religious Fanaticism to Reinforce the State"
author: Internationalist Perspective
date: 1989
description: Written by Mac Intosh for Internationalist Perspective 15. From <https://web.archive.org/web/20200202230146/http://www.internationalist-perspective.org/IP/ip-archive/ip_15_islamic.html>.
...

The past decade has been a wave of "Islamic fundamentalism" roll over
the Muslim world. The Shia world has seen the consolidation of an
"Islamic republic" in Iran, under the charismatic leadership of the
Ayotollah Khomeini. In the suburbs of West Beirut, the Party of God or
Hizbollah has become a powerful military and political force as hostile
to the Baathist regime in Syria as to the Zionist state of Israel and a
major factor in the Lebanese imbroglio. In the Sunni world, the
"fundamentalist" Muslim Brotherhood is an increasingly potent political
force in a string of Arab states, and a particular thorn in the side of
Assad in Syria and Murbarak in Egypt, whose regimes it is determined to
overthrow. In Libya, Colonel Khaddafi has made himself into the avatar
of "Islamic fundamentalism", which he is determined to spread across
North Africa. Islamic fundamentalism has also become a decisive factor
in the politics of South Asia, from Afghanistan, Pakistan and India to
Malaysia, Indonesia and the Philippines.

Both academics and politicians in the West and mullahs and partisans of
"fundamentalism" in the Muslim world present this phenomenon as a
revival of religion a rebirth of the faith of the Prophet, which in the
West can be portrayed as a recrudescence of superstition and
obscurantism, and which in the East is portrayed as an ethico-utopian
revival directed against the evils of modernity and capitalism. Both
views of Islamic fundamentalism, each serving the ideological interests
of those who articulate them, are wrong. Unfortunately, revolutionary
Marxists, mesmerized by the religious trappings and symbols of this
phenomenon, have accepted its claims to constitute a religious revival,
against which it is sufficient to respond with Marx's famous phrase --
itself most often ripped out of context -- about the "opium of the
people." While there can be no doubt that Islamic fundamentalism is a
mystification, its political potency, its capacity for mass mobilization
and the constitution or consolidation of a state apparatus, and its real
thrust as a bulwark against socialism and proletarian revolution in the
Muslim world, will be completely misled if it is seen as a religious
phenomenon.

A real de-mystification of Islamic fundamentalism rests on two basic
insights, which will be elaborated in this article. First, the very term
"Islamic fundamentalism" with its theological overtones is a misnomer.
Despite its religious trappings and symbolism, Islamic fundamentalism is
not a religious phenomenon at all. Indeed far from representing a
revival of the doctrines and traditions of Islam, this movement is based
on a rejection of much of the doctrinal core and traditional
institutional bases of Islam. Second, the real character of Islamic
fundamentalism is that of a political ideology generated by the
imperative of state capitalism. It is the social conditions peculiar to
the Muslim world in the era of capitalist decadence, the necessity for
an ideological response adequate to the needs of capitalism, that have
generated the phenomenon designated as "Islamic fundamentalism."

The extent to which Islamic fundamentalism has repudiated the very
traditions of Islam which it claims to defend can be seen in its
cultural and political monolithism. Classical Islam was doctrinally and
theologically pluralistic. The absence within Islam of any supreme
doctrinal authority such as Western Christianity historically possessed
in the form of the Councils and the Papacy, both encouraged and
reflected its pluralism. Whereas in the Christian world outside of
doctrinal orthodoxy there was only heresy, on the classical Muslim world
widely divergent schools of thought and a multitude of sects and
movements flourished -- all within the ambit of what was generally
accepted as Islam. The ruthless monolithism and intolerance
characteristic of Islamic fundamentalism and its political regimes
stands in stark contrast to the pluralism of the classical Islamic
world. Indeed, these features of Islamic fundamentalism are shared with
fascism and Stalinism and constitute the very embodiment of the most
barbarous tendencies of twentieth century state capitalism. This can
perhaps best be seen in the Salman Rushdie affair, where the death
sentence handed down by the Ayotollah Khomeini not merely violates both
the spirit of traditional Islam and the letter of its law, but
corresponds solely to the totalitarian requirement of the modern
capitalist state for a mass mobilization and xenophobic reaction so as
to insure ideological control over the population.

The relationship between civil society and the state provides a further
indication of the degree to which fundamentalism violates the
traditional framework of the Islamic world. In classical Islam, there is
no basis for an assimilation of religion to the state. Nothing
comparable to the tradition of Caesaropapism in both occidental and
oriental Christianity with its merger of church and state. Furthermore
classical Islam permits no reduction of civil society to the state. In
fact Muslim law, the Shari'at, as the codification of an ideal ethical
system was a check on the unrestrained political power of the despotic
state. The 'ulama, the specialists in doctrine and the interpretation of
the law, was traditionally a formidable counterweight to and opponent of
the state apparatus. Indeed, following the depredations of the Abbasids
(8th century) the 'ulama and the Shari'at "became the expression of the
autonomy of society at large against the absolute monarchy."(Marshall G
S Hodgson, "Islam and image", _History of Religions_, vol. 3, 1964, p.
234). This pattern is not confined to the Sunni world. In Shi'ism
distrust of worldly power and the state is historically ubiquitous.

By contrast, Islamic fundamentalism is committed to the ruthless
suppression of civil society and the subordination of religion to the
needs of the totalitarian state. The very social fabric of traditional
Muslim society, already in tatters under the impact of capitalism,
receives its coup de grace from the state apparatus constructed by those
who claim to preserve it: the Islamic republic under its Khomeinist or
Kaddafist forms is the totalitarian state form which uproots the last
remnants of traditional social and cultural forms ill suited to the
requirements of capitalism in the Muslim world. This is but one more
example of the ruse of history!

Even looked at sociologically, Islamic fundamentalism is not an
expression of traditional Islam. The social roots and class bases of
Islamic fundamentalism are not the clerics ('alim and mullahs) of the
traditional Sunni and Shia worlds, the remnants of which still exist,
but rather are by and large to be sought in the modern, capitalist,
sectors of society: the urban centres, the universities, school
teachers, academics, engineers, etc. Even in Khomeini's "Islamic
republic" where mullahs play a decisive role, this stratum was, in fact,
deeply divided. Many mullahs objected to the role allotted the state,
which so clashed with traditional patterns, and many of the Ayotollahs
opposed Khomeini's assumption of dictatorial powers and pretensions to
be the Imam as contrary to the doctrines of Shia Islam (one thinks, for
example, of the ill fated Ayotollah Shariat Madari). In many cases these
clerics who opposed Khomeini's project acted in defence of traditional
landed interests. Nonetheless, this only points up the incompatibility
of traditional Islam and the fundamentalism enshrined in the "Islamic
Republic". Those mullahs in the forefront of the Khomeinist regime are
closely linked to the urban strata which constitute the decisive social
base of fundamentalism throughout the Muslim world today. Their goal is
to absorb civil society into a totalitarian state which they will direct
and administer -- a state which of necessity is the embodiment of the
capitalist law of value.

Under the ideological guise of reconstituting the political structure of
the earliest Muslim community, and by directing their mass appeal to the
peasant and traditional petty bourgeois masses seething with discontent,
these urban strata which direct the fundamentalist movements seek to
become the functionaries of a statified capital. Whereas traditional
Islam was indifferent if not outright hostile towards the state, Islamic
fundamentalism is an ideology dedicated to the formation of an
omnipotent state. The fanaticism of Islamic fundamentalism is not a
religious fanaticism, a throwback to the Middle Ages as it is portrayed
in the West, but rather a state fanaticism typical of decadent
capitalism everywhere, however much the particular forms may vary from
one sector of the world market to another.

There remains the question of what specifies configuration of forces has
generated fundamentalism in the Muslim world as a movement and ideology
while can respond to the imperatives of state capitalism. State
capitalism is not a phenomenon confined to the backward capitalist
societies or the result of a failed proletarian revolution as some have
claimed. It is the universal tendency of capitalism in its phase of
permanent crisis and as such its classic embodiment is in the most
advanced capitalist societies of Western Europe and North America. In
these societies, state capitalism has been built so to speak from the
bottom up. The capitalist law of value, originally confined to the
actual process of immediate production (formal domination of capital)
spread to the process of circulation and consumption, ultimately
invading every facet of social and personal life and subjecting the
whole of civil society to its sway (real domination of capital). This
coincided with the permanent crisis of capitalism, and ended in the
state becoming the crystallization of the law of value and swallowing
civil society itself. In the backward societies where the process of
capitalization itself largely coincided within set of capitalist
decadence, the imperative of state capitalism made itself felt well
before such an organic process could run its course (in some cases when
it had scarcely begun). As a result in large parts of the world state
capitalism emerged in the absence of the socio-economic and political
foundations which existed in the West; to a considerable degree it had
to be constructed from the top down. To compensate for the weakness of
its foundations, state capitalism in these societies took on more
violent forms, the totalitarian state operating less with the enormous
power of surveillance and control represented by a well articulated
civil society now thoroughly incorporated within it, than through the
more direct application of force and violence which its weak
articulation necessitated.

To compensate for its weaknesses, the capitalist state in these
societies has typically had recourse to the most racist and xenophobic
forms of nationalism as the only ideological glue capable of
consolidating its rule. In the Muslim world, however, even nationalism,
in the absence of well articulated nation-states, has often proven
inadequate to the task of providing an ideological basis for the
capitalist state. Throughout North Africa, for example, the existence of
different ethnic groups (Arab, Berber), and the persistence of
tribalism, makes an Islamic ideology a far more effective basis for mass
mobilization than nationalistic appeals. Such the same is true in
Afghanistan and Pakistan, where there is no such thing as an Afghan or
Pakistani nation and where only an Islamic ideology promises to provide
a basis for the construction of a stable entity. In Iran and Indonesia,
the existence of rival ethnic groups within the frontiers of the same
state (e.g. Azeris, Baluchis, Arabs as well as Farsi speakers in Iran)
has made recourse to an Islamic ideology an alternative to possible
civil wars and disintegration of the politico-economic entity. In each
of these cases, Islamic ideology functions not as a religion, but as an
ersatz nationalism, a means by which the functionaries of capital can
seek to forge a mass base and try to legitimate their rule.

The spread of Islamic fundamentalism across the Muslim world can only be
understood and resisted if it is clear that we are facing a phenomenon
that is modern, not medieval, and capitalist, not traditional. The
capacity of the Islamic ideology to mobilize the impoverished masses of
the Muslim world is certainly enhanced by its anti-capitalist rhetoric,
its crass appeal to a traditional world destroyed by the "Satanic"
forces of modernity and westernization. Nonetheless, behind this
ideological cloak lurks the imperative of state capitalism and the law
of value itself. In that sense, the Islamic ideology cannot satisfy the
hopes which the masses who have rallied to its cause have invested in
it. Moreover, Islamic fundamentalism cannot assure the construction of a
stable socio-political entity as a necessary framework for the operation
of the capitalist law of value. This effort to construct a durable state
capitalist entity from the top down is doomed to fail. The existence of
a permanent crisis of capitalism as a mode of production, the existence
of an open economic crisis, which is most devastating in the Third
World, and the absence of the necessary framework in the for of a well
articulated civil society shaped by the law of value, mean that the
state apparatus forged in the name of the Islamic ideology will simply
preside over a process of increasing capitalist barbarization.

The world of traditional Islam is dead, and the Islamic ideology which
promises to preserve it, in reality is its gravedigger. However, what it
brings in its place is not historical progress, which in this epoch can
only take the form of international proletarian revolution, but rather
the dark night of totalitarian state capitalism.
