---
title: "Excerpt from A World Without Money: Communism"
author: Les Amis de 4 Millions de Jeunes Travailleurs
date: 1975-1976
description: "An article made of excerpts of the 1975-1976 book 'A World Without Money' ('Un Monde Sans Argent: Le Communisme'). Translation and article by Socialist Party of Great Britain, published in their publication Socialist Standard in July 1979. Originally posted online, with the SPGB's introduction, at <https://web.archive.org/web/20091027060011/https://www.geocities.com/~johngray/stanmond.htm>. Another translation of this section, with slightly different wording, is also available on red texts as part of the full 'A World Without Money.'"
...

Communism is the negation of capitalism. A movement produced by the
development and very success of the capitalist mode of production which
will end by overthrowing it and giving birth to a new kind of society.
In place of a world based on the wages system and commodities must come
into being a world where human activity will never again take the form
of wage labour and where the products of such activity will no longer be
objects of commerce.

Communism does not overthrow capital in order to restore commodities to
their original state. Commodity exchange is a link and a progress. But
it is a link between antagonistic parts. It will disappear without there
being a return to barter, that primitive form of exchange. Humanity will
no longer be divided into opposed groups or into enterprises. It will
organise itself to plan and use its common heritage and to share out
duties and enjoyments. The logic of sharing will replace the logic of
exchange.

Money will disappear. It is not a neutral instrument of measurement. It
is the commodity in which all other commodities are reflected.

Gold, silver and diamonds will no longer have any value apart from that
arising from their own utility. Gold can be reserved in accordance with
Lenin's wish, for the construction of public lavatories.

## Marx and Engels

Marx and Engels set themselves the task of understanding the development
of capitalist society. They did not concern themselves much with
description of the future world such as had monopolised the efforts of
the utopian socialists. But criticism of capitalism cannot be completely
separated from a commitment to communism. The historical role of money
and the state can only be really understood from the viewpoint of their
disappearance.

That Marx and Engels did not talk more about communist society was due,
without doubt paradoxically, to the fact that this society, being less
near than it is today, was more difficult to envisage, but also to the
fact that it was more present in the minds of the revolutionaries of
their day. When they spoke of the abolition of the wages system in the
Communist Manifesto they were understood by those they were echoing.
Today it is more difficult to envisage a world freed from the state and
commodities because these have become omnipresent. But having become
omnipresent, they have lost their historical necessity.

Marx and Engels perhaps grasped less well than a Fourier the nature of
communism as the liberation and harmonisation of the emotions. Fourier,
however, does not get away from the wages system, since among other
things he still wants doctors to be paid, even if according to the
health of the community rather than the illnesses of their patients.

Marx and Engels, however, were sufficiently precise to avoid
responsibility for the bureaucracy and financial system of the
'communist' countries being attributed to them. According to Marx, with
the coming of communism money straightaway disappears and the producers
cease to exchange their products. Engels speaks of the disappearance of
commodity production when socialism comes. And don't let anyone speak to
us about an error of youth, as a whole rabble of marxologists has
acquired the habit of doing. Our references are the Critique of the
Gotha Programme and Anti-DÃ¼hring.

## The end of property

What is property? This is not so simple a question to answer. Witness
the polemic between Marx and Proudhon. The latter had proposed that
'property is theft'. Proudhon well understood that property does not
originate in nature. It is the product of a society where reign
relationships of power, violence and the appropriation of the labour of
others. It is said that property is theft, while theft is only defined
with reference to property; this is to turn round in circles.

The problem becomes more complicated when you go on from property to the
abolition of property. Should all property, whether involving means of
production or personal possessions, be abolished? Should it be done
selectively? Should there be a radical break with all property and
anything that resembles it?

Communism chooses this last proposition. It is not a question of
transferring property titles but of the simple disappearance of
property. In revolutionary society no-one will be able to 'use and
abuse' a good because they are its owner. There will be no exceptions to
this rule. Buildings, pins, plots of land will no longer belong to
anyone, or if you like, they will belong to everybody. The very idea of
property will rapidly be considered absurd.

Will everything then equally belong to everybody? Will the first-comer
be able to put me out of my house, take my clothes off me or take bread
from out of my mouth just because I will no longer be the owner of my
house, my clothes or my food? Certainly not; on the contrary, each
person's material and emotional security will be strengthened. It is
simply that it will not be the right of property that will be invoked as
a protection, but directly the interest of the person concerned.
Everybody will have to be able to satisfy their hunger -- and be housed
and clothed -- at their convenience. Everybody will have to be able to
live in peace.

## From scarcity to abundance

The right and the sentiment of property will die out in communist
society because scarcity will disappear. People will no longer have to
cling to an object for fear of not being able to enjoy it any more if
they let go of it for a single instant.

By what magic do you intend to bring out this fabulous era of abundance?
the bourgeois will ask ironically. There's no magic about it. We will be
able to make abundance appear because it is already here under our feet.
It is not a question of creating it but simply of liberating it. It is
precisely capital, through submitting people and nature to its yoke for
many centuries, that has made abundance a possibility. It is not that
communism is suddenly going to produce abundance but that capitalism
artificially maintains scarcity.

In communist societies goods will be freely available and free of
charge. The organisation of society to its very foundations will be
without money.

How can we prevent wealth being grasped by some at the expense of
others? Won't our society, after a moment of euphoria while people help
themselves to existing resources, risk sliding into chaos and inequality
before sinking into disorder and terror?

In developed communist society the productive forces will be sufficient
to meet needs. The frantic and neurotic desire to consume and hoard will
disappear. It will be absurd to want to accumulate things: there will no
longer be money to be pocketed nor wage-earners to be hired. Why
accumulate tins of beans or false teeth which you won't use?

In this new world people will not have to constantly pay and keep
accounts in order to feed themselves, travel about or amuse themselves.
They will rapidly lose the habit. From this will spring a feeling of
being genuinely free. People will feel at home everywhere. Not being
constantly under surveillance, they won't be tempted to cheat. Why seek
to lie or build up secret stocks when you are certain of being able to
have your fill?

Gradually the sentiment of property will disappear and will appear
retrospectively as somewhat odd and mean. Why cling to an object or a
person when the whole world is yours?

The new people will resemble their hunting and gathering ancestors who
trusted in a nature which supplied them freely and often abundantly with
what they needed to live, and who had no worry for the morrow, over
which in any case they had no control. For the people of tomorrow,
nature will be the world they will have themselves fashioned and the
abundance will be created by their own hands. They will be sure of
themselves because they will have confidence in their strength and will
know their limitations. They will be without worry because they will
know that the morrow belongs to them. Death? It exists. But it is
pointless crying over what is inevitable. The point is to be in a
position to enjoy the present moment.
