---
title: "Preface to \"A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy\""
author: Marx, Karl
date: 1859
description: "Marx's preface to his preparatory work for \"Das Kapital\", well-known for it's elaborations on the *materials conception of history* and the \"base-superstructure\" analogy. English text from the [MIA](https://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1859/critique-pol-economy/preface.htm) and [wikisource](https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/A_Contribution_to_the_Critique_of_Political_Economy), while comparing it with the [German original](http://posner.library.cmu.edu/Posner/books/book.cgi?call=335.4_M39K_1859)."
...

I examine the system of bourgeois economy in the following order:
*capital*, *landed property*, *wage-labour*; *the State*, *foreign
trade*, *world market*. The economic conditions of existence of the
three great classes into which modern bourgeois society is divided are
analysed under the first three headings; the interconnection of the
other three headings is self-evident. The first part of the first book,
dealing with Capital, comprises the following chapters: 1. The
commodity, 2. Money or simple circulation; 3. Capital in general. The
present part consists of the first two chapters. The entire material
lies before me in the form of monographs, which were written not for
publication but for self-clarification at widely separated periods;
their remoulding into an integrated whole according to the plan I have
indicated will depend upon circumstances.

A general introduction, which I had drafted, is omitted, since on
further consideration it seems to me confusing to anticipate results
which still have to be substantiated, and the reader who really wishes
to follow me will have to decide to advance from the particular to the
general. A few brief remarks regarding the course of my study of
political economy are appropriate here.

Although I studied jurisprudence, I pursued it as a subject subordinated
to philosophy and history. In the year 1842-43, as editor of the
*Rheinische Zeitung*, I first found myself in the embarrassing position
of having to discuss what is known as material interests. The
deliberations of the Rhenish Landtag on forest thefts and the division
of landed property; the official polemic started by Herr von Schaper,
then Oberpräsident of the Rhine Province, against the *Rheinische
Zeitung* about the condition of the Moselle peasantry, and finally the
debates on free trade and protective tariffs caused me in the first
instance to turn my attention to economic questions. On the other hand,
at that time when good intentions "to push forward" often took the place
of factual knowledge, an echo of French socialism and communism,
slightly tinged by philosophy, was noticeable in the *Rheinische
Zeitung*. I objected to this dilettantism, but at the same time frankly
admitted in a controversy with the *Allgemeine Augsburger Zeitung* that
my previous studies did not allow me to express any opinion on the
content of the French theories. When the publishers of the *Rheinische
Zeitung* conceived the illusion that by a more compliant policy on the
part of the paper it might be possible to secure the abrogation of the
death sentence passed upon it, I eagerly grasped the opportunity to
withdraw from the public stage to my study.

The first work which I undertook to dispel the doubts assailing me was a
critical re-examination of the Hegelian philosophy of law; the
introduction to this work being published in the *Deutsch-Franzosische
Jahrbucher* issued in Paris in 1844. My inquiry led me to the conclusion
that neither legal relations nor political forms could be comprehended
whether by themselves or on the basis of a so-called general development
of the human mind, but that on the contrary they originate in the
material conditions of life, the totality of which Hegel, following the
example of English and French thinkers of the eighteenth century,
embraces within the term "civil society"; that the anatomy of this civil
society, however, has to be sought in political economy. The study of
this, which I began in Paris, I continued in Brussels, where I moved
owing to an expulsion order issued by M. Guizot. The general conclusion
at which I arrived and which, once reached, became the guiding principle
of my studies can be summarised as follows.

In the social production of their existence, men inevitably enter into
definite relations, which are independent of their will, namely
relations of production appropriate to a given stage in the development
of their material forces of production. The totality of these relations
of production constitutes the economic structure of society, the real
foundation, on which arises a legal and political superstructure and to
which correspond definite forms of social consciousness. The mode of
production of material life conditions the general process of social,
political and intellectual life. It is not the consciousness of men that
determines their existence, but their social existence that determines
their consciousness. At a certain stage of development, the material
productive forces of society come into conflict with the existing
relations of production or -- this merely expresses the same thing in
legal terms -- with the property relations within the framework of which
they have operated hitherto. From forms of development of the productive
forces these relations turn into their fetters. Then begins an era of
social revolution. The changes in the economic foundation lead sooner or
later to the transformation of the whole immense superstructure.

In studying such transformations it is always necessary to distinguish
between the material transformation of the economic conditions of
production, which can be determined with the precision of natural
science, and the legal, political, religious, artistic or philosophic --
in short, ideological forms in which men become conscious of this
conflict and fight it out. Just as one does not judge an individual by
what he thinks about himself, so one cannot judge such a period of
transformation by its consciousness, but, on the contrary, this
consciousness must be explained from the contradictions of material
life, from the conflict existing between the social forces of production
and the relations of production. No social order is ever destroyed
before all the productive forces for which it is sufficient have been
developed, and new superior relations of production never replace older
ones before the material conditions for their existence have matured
within the framework of the old society.

Mankind thus inevitably sets itself only such tasks as it is able to
solve, since closer examination will always show that the problem itself
arises only when the material conditions for its solution are already
present or at least in the course of formation. In broad outline, the
Asiatic, ancient, feudal and modern bourgeois modes of production may be
designated as epochs marking progress in the economic development of
society. The bourgeois mode of production is the last antagonistic form
of the social process of production -- antagonistic not in the sense of
individual antagonism but of an antagonism that emanates from the
individuals' social conditions of existence -- but the productive forces
developing within bourgeois society create also the material conditions
for a solution of this antagonism. The prehistory of human society
accordingly closes with this social formation.

Frederick Engels, with whom I maintained a constant exchange of ideas by
correspondence since the publication of his brilliant essay on the
critique of economic categories (printed in the *Deutsch-Französische
Jahrbücher*, arrived by another road (see his "Condition of the Working
Classes in England") at the same result as I, and when in the spring of
1845 he too came to live in Brussels, we decided to set forth together
our conception as opposed to the ideological one of German philosophy,
in fact to settle accounts with our former philosophical conscience. The
intention was carried out in the form of a critique of post-Hegelian
philosophy. The manuscript [The German Ideology], two large octavo
volumes, had long ago reached the publishers in Westphalia when we were
informed that owing to changed circumstances it could not be printed. We
abandoned the manuscript to the gnawing criticism of the mice all the
more willingly since we had achieved our main purpose --
self-clarification. Of the scattered works in which at that time we
presented one or another aspect of our views to the public, I shall
mention only the *Manifesto of the Communist Party*, jointly written by
Engels and myself, and a *Discours sur le libre-échange*, which I myself
published. The salient points of our conception were first outlined in
an academic, although polemical, form in my *Misère de la Philosophie,
etc.* this book which was aimed at Proudhon appeared in 1847. The
publication of an essay on Wage-Labour [*Wage-Labor and Capital*]
written in German in which I combined the lectures I had held on this
subject at the German Workers' Association in Brussels, was interrupted
by the February Revolution and my forcible removal from Belgium in
consequence.

The publication of the *Neue Rheinische Zeitung* in 1848 and 1849, and
the events which took place later on, interrupted my economic studies
which I could not resume before 1850 in London. The enormous material on
the history of political economy which is accumulated in the British
Museum; the favourable view which London offers for the observation of
bourgeois society; finally, the new stage of development upon which the
latter seemed to have entered with the discovery of gold in California
and Australia, led me to the decision to resume my studies from the very
beginning and work up critically the new material. These studies partly
led to what might seem side questions, over which I nevertheless had to
stop for longer or shorter periods of time. Especially was the time at
my disposal cut down by the imperative necessity of working for a
living. My work as contributor on the leading Anglo-American newspaper,
the *New York Tribune*, at which I have now been engaged for eight
years, has caused very great interruption in my studies, since I engage
in newspaper work proper only occasionally. Yet articles on important
economic events in England and on the continent have formed so large a
part of my contributions that I have been obliged to make myself
familiar with practical details which lie outside the proper sphere of
political economy.

This account of the course of my studies in political economy is simply
to prove that my views, whatever one may think of them, and no matter
how little they agree with the interested prejudices of the ruling
classes, are the result of many years of conscientious research. At the
entrance to science, however, the same requirement must be put as at the
entrance to hell:

>*Qui si convien lasciare ogni sospetto*
>
>*Ogni viltà convien che qui sia morta.*

Karl Marx London, January 1859.
