---
title: The German Ideology, Part I
author:
- Marx, Karl
- Engels, Friedrich
date: 1845
description: Marx and Engels work outlining the "materialist conception of history". From <https://marxists.catbull.com/archive/marx/works/1845/german-ideology/ch01.htm>. Some notes not included.
keywords:
- Ideology
- History
...

# Idealism and Materialism

## The Illusions of German Ideology

As we hear from German ideologists, Germany has in the last few years
gone through an unparalleled revolution. The decomposition of the
Hegelian philosophy, which began with Strauss, has developed into a
universal ferment into which all the "powers of the past" are swept. In
the general chaos mighty empires have arisen only to meet with immediate
doom, heroes have emerged momentarily only to be hurled back into
obscurity by bolder and stronger rivals. It was a revolution beside
which the French Revolution was child's play, a world struggle beside
which the struggles of the Diadochi [successors of Alexander the Great]
appear insignificant. Principles ousted one another, heroes of the mind
overthrew each other with unheard-of rapidity, and in the three years
1842-45 more of the past was swept away in Germany than at other times
in three centuries.

All this is supposed to have taken place in the realm of pure thought.

Certainly it is an interesting event we are dealing with: the
putrescence of the absolute spirit. When the last spark of its life had
failed, the various components of this caput mortuum began to decompose,
entered into new combinations and formed new substances. The
industrialists of philosophy, who till then had lived on the
exploitation of the absolute spirit, now seized upon the new
combinations. Each with all possible zeal set about retailing his
apportioned share. This naturally gave rise to competition, which, to
start with, was carried on in moderately staid bourgeois fashion. Later
when the German market was glutted, and the commodity in spite of all
efforts found no response in the world market, the business was spoiled
in the usual German manner by fabricated and fictitious production,
deterioration in quality, adulteration of the raw materials,
falsification of labels, fictitious purchases, bill-jobbing and a credit
system devoid of any real basis. The competition turned into a bitter
struggle, which is now being extolled and interpreted to us as a
revolution of world significance, the begetter of the most prodigious
results and achievements.

If we wish to rate at its true value this philosophic charlatanry, which
awakens even in the breast of the honest German citizen a glow of
national pride, if we wish to bring out clearly the pettiness, the
parochial narrowness of this whole Young-Hegelian movement and in
particular the tragicomic contrast between the illusions of these heroes
about their achievements and the actual achievements themselves, we must
look at the whole spectacle from a standpoint beyond the frontiers of
Germany.

## Ideology in General, German Ideology in Particular

German criticism has, right up to its latest efforts, never quitted the
realm of philosophy. Far from examining its general philosophic
premises, the whole body of its inquiries has actually sprung from the
soil of a definite philosophical system, that of Hegel. Not only in
their answers but in their very questions there was a mystification.
This dependence on Hegel is the reason why not one of these modern
critics has even attempted a comprehensive criticism of the Hegelian
system, however much each professes to have advanced beyond Hegel. Their
polemics against Hegel and against one another are confined to this --
each extracts one side of the Hegelian system and turns this against the
whole system as well as against the sides extracted by the others. To
begin with they extracted pure unfalsified Hegelian categories such as
"substance" and "self-consciousness," later they desecrated these
categories with more secular names such as species "the Unique," "Man,"
etc.

The entire body of German philosophical criticism from Strauss to
Stirner is confined to criticism of religious conceptions. The critics
started from real religion and actual theology. What religious
consciousness and a religious conception really meant was determined
variously as they went along. Their advance consisted in subsuming the
allegedly dominant metaphysical, political, juridical, moral and other
conceptions under the class of religious or theological conceptions; and
similarly in pronouncing political, juridical, moral consciousness as
religious or theological, and the political, juridical, moral man --
"man" in the last resort -- as religious. The dominance of religion was
taken for granted. Gradually every dominant relationship was pronounced
a religious relationship and transformed into a cult, a cult of law, a
cult of the State, etc. On all sides it was only a question of dogmas
and belief in dogmas. The world was sanctified to an ever-increasing
extent till at last our venerable Saint Max was able to canonise it en
bloc and thus dispose of it once for all.

The Old Hegelians had comprehended everything as soon as it was reduced
to an Hegelian logical category. The Young Hegelians criticised
everything by attributing to it religious conceptions or by pronouncing
it a theological matter. The Young Hegelians are in agreement with the
Old Hegelians in their belief in the rule of religion, of concepts, of a
universal principle in the existing world. Only, the one party attacks
this dominion as usurpation, while the other extols it as legitimate.

Since the Young Hegelians consider conceptions, thoughts, ideas, in fact
all the products of consciousness, to which they attribute an
independent existence, as the real chains of men (just as the Old
Hegelians declared them the true bonds of human society) it is evident
that the Young Hegelians have to fight only against these illusions of
consciousness. Since, according to their fantasy, the relationships of
men, all their doings, their chains and their limitations are products
of their consciousness, the Young Hegelians logically put to men the
moral postulate of exchanging their present consciousness for human,
critical or egoistic consciousness, and thus of removing their
limitations. This demand to change consciousness amounts to a demand to
interpret reality in another way, i.e. to recognise it by means of
another interpretation. The Young-Hegelian ideologists, in spite of
their allegedly "world-shattering" statements, are the staunchest
conservatives. The most recent of them have found the correct expression
for their activity when they declare they are only fighting against
"phrases." They forget, however, that to these phrases they themselves
are only opposing other phrases, and that they are in no way combating
the real existing world when they are merely combating the phrases of
this world. The only results which this philosophic criticism could
achieve were a few (and at that thoroughly one-sided) elucidations of
Christianity from the point of view of religious history; all the rest
of their assertions are only further embellishments of their claim to
have furnished, in these unimportant elucidations, discoveries of
universal importance.

It has not occurred to any one of these philosophers to inquire into the
connection of German philosophy with German reality, the relation of
their criticism to their own material surroundings.

### First Premises of Materialist Method

The premises from which we begin are not arbitrary ones, not dogmas, but
real premises from which abstraction can only be made in the
imagination. They are the real individuals, their activity and the
material conditions under which they live, both those which they find
already existing and those produced by their activity. These premises
can thus be verified in a purely empirical way.

The first premise of all human history is, of course, the existence of
living human individuals. Thus the first fact to be established is the
physical organisation of these individuals and their consequent relation
to the rest of nature. Of course, we cannot here go either into the
actual physical nature of man, or into the natural conditions in which
man finds himself -- geological, hydrographical, climatic and so on. The
writing of history must always set out from these natural bases and
their modification in the course of history through the action of men.

Men can be distinguished from animals by consciousness, by religion or
anything else you like. They themselves begin to distinguish themselves
from animals as soon as they begin to produce their means of
subsistence, a step which is conditioned by their physical organisation.
By producing their means of subsistence men are indirectly producing
their actual material life.

The way in which men produce their means of subsistence depends first of
all on the nature of the actual means of subsistence they find in
existence and have to reproduce. This mode of production must not be
considered simply as being the production of the physical existence of
the individuals. Rather it is a definite form of activity of these
individuals, a definite form of expressing their life, a definite mode
of life on their part. As individuals express their life, so they are.
What they are, therefore, coincides with their production, both with
what they produce and with how they produce. The nature of individuals
thus depends on the material conditions determining their production.

This production only makes its appearance with the increase of
population. In its turn this presupposes the intercourse [*Verkehr*] of
individuals with one another. The form of this intercourse is again
determined by production.

### Production and Intercourse Division of Labour and Forms of Property -- Tribal, Ancient, Feudal

The relations of different nations among themselves depend upon the
extent to which each has developed its productive forces, the division
of labour and internal intercourse. This statement is generally
recognised. But not only the relation of one nation to others, but also
the whole internal structure of the nation itself depends on the stage
of development reached by its production and its internal and external
intercourse. How far the productive forces of a nation are developed is
shown most manifestly by the degree to which the division of labour has
been carried. Each new productive force, insofar as it is not merely a
quantitative extension of productive forces already known (for instance
the bringing into cultivation of fresh land), causes a further
development of the division of labour.

The division of labour inside a nation leads at first to the separation
of industrial and commercial from agricultural labour, and hence to the
separation of town and country and to the conflict of their interests.
Its further development leads to the separation of commercial from
industrial labour. At the same time through the division of labour
inside these various branches there develop various divisions among the
individuals co-operating in definite kinds of labour. The relative
position of these individual groups is determined by the methods
employed in agriculture, industry and commerce (patriarchalism, slavery,
estates, classes). These same conditions are to be seen (given a more
developed intercourse) in the relations of different nations to one
another.

The various stages of development in the division of labour are just so
many different forms of ownership, i.e. the existing stage in the
division of labour determines also the relations of individuals to one
another with reference to the material, instrument, and product of
labour.

The first form of ownership is tribal [Stammeigentum] ownership. It
corresponds to the undeveloped stage of production, at which a people
lives by hunting and fishing, by the rearing of beasts or, in the
highest stage, agriculture. In the latter case it presupposes a great
mass of uncultivated stretches of land. The division of labour is at
this stage still very elementary and is confined to a further extension
of the natural division of labour existing in the family. The social
structure is, therefore, limited to an extension of the family;
patriarchal family chieftains, below them the members of the tribe,
finally slaves. The slavery latent in the family only develops gradually
with the increase of population, the growth of wants, and with the
extension of external relations, both of war and of barter.

The second form is the ancient communal and State ownership which
proceeds especially from the union of several tribes into a city by
agreement or by conquest, and which is still accompanied by slavery.
Beside communal ownership we already find movable, and later also
immovable, private property developing, but as an abnormal form
subordinate to communal ownership. The citizens hold power over their
labouring slaves only in their community, and on this account alone,
therefore, they are bound to the form of communal ownership. It is the
communal private property which compels the active citizens to remain in
this spontaneously derived form of association over against their
slaves. For this reason the whole structure of society based on this
communal ownership, and with it the power of the people, decays in the
same measure as, in particular, immovable private property evolves. The
division of labour is already more developed. We already find the
antagonism of town and country; later the antagonism between those
states which represent town interests and those which represent country
interests, and inside the towns themselves the antagonism between
industry and maritime commerce. The class relation between citizens and
slaves is now completely developed.

With the development of private property, we find here for the first
time the same conditions which we shall find again, only on a more
extensive scale, with modern private property. On the one hand, the
concentration of private property, which began very early in Rome (as
the Licinian agrarian law proves) and proceeded very rapidly from the
time of the civil wars and especially under the Emperors; on the other
hand, coupled with this, the transformation of the plebeian small
peasantry into a proletariat, which, however, owing to its intermediate
position between propertied citizens and slaves, never achieved an
independent development.

The third form of ownership is feudal or estate property. If antiquity
started out from the town and its little territory, the Middle Ages
started out from the country. This different starting-point was
determined by the sparseness of the population at that time, which was
scattered over a large area and which received no large increase from
the conquerors. In contrast to Greece and Rome, feudal development at
the outset, therefore, extends over a much wider territory, prepared by
the Roman conquests and the spread of agriculture at first associated
with it. The last centuries of the declining Roman Empire and its
conquest by the barbarians destroyed a number of productive forces;
agriculture had declined, industry had decayed for want of a market,
trade had died out or been violently suspended, the rural and urban
population had decreased. From these conditions and the mode of
organisation of the conquest determined by them, feudal property
developed under the influence of the Germanic military constitution.
Like tribal and communal ownership, it is based again on a community;
but the directly producing class standing over against it is not, as in
the case of the ancient community, the slaves, but the enserfed small
peasantry. As soon as feudalism is fully developed, there also arises
antagonism to the towns. The hierarchical structure of land ownership,
and the armed bodies of retainers associated with it, gave the nobility
power over the serfs. This feudal organisation was, just as much as the
ancient communal ownership, an association against a subjected producing
class; but the form of association and the relation to the direct
producers were different because of the different conditions of
production.

This feudal system of land ownership had its counterpart in the towns in
the shape of corporative property, the feudal organisation of trades.
Here property consisted chiefly in the labour of each individual person.
The necessity for association against the organised robber-nobility, the
need for communal covered markets in an age when the industrialist was
at the same time a merchant, the growing competition of the escaped
serfs swarming into the rising towns, the feudal structure of the whole
country: these combined to bring about the guilds. The gradually
accumulated small capital of individual craftsmen and their stable
numbers, as against the growing population, evolved the relation of
journeyman and apprentice, which brought into being in the towns a
hierarchy similar to that in the country.

Thus the chief form of property during the feudal epoch consisted on the
one hand of landed property with serf labour chained to it, and on the
other of the labour of the individual with small capital commanding the
labour of journeymen. The organisation of both was determined by the
restricted conditions of production -- the small-scale and primitive
cultivation of the land, and the craft type of industry. There was
little division of labour in the heyday of feudalism. Each country bore
in itself the antithesis of town and country; the division into estates
was certainly strongly marked; but apart from the differentiation of
princes, nobility, clergy and peasants in the country, and masters,
journeymen, apprentices and soon also the rabble of casual labourers in
the towns, no division of importance took place. In agriculture it was
rendered difficult by the strip-system, beside which the cottage
industry of the peasants themselves emerged. In industry there was no
division of labour at all in the individual trades themselves, and very
little between them. The separation of industry and commerce was found
already in existence in older towns; in the newer it only developed
later, when the towns entered into mutual relations.

The grouping of larger territories into feudal kingdoms was a necessity
for the landed nobility as for the towns. The organisation of the ruling
class, the nobility, had, therefore, everywhere a monarch at its head.

### The Essence of the Materialist Conception of History. Social Being and Social Consciousness

The fact is, therefore, that definite individuals who are productively
active in a definite way enter into these definite social and political
relations. Empirical observation must in each separate instance bring
out empirically, and without any mystification and speculation, the
connection of the social and political structure with production. The
social structure and the State are continually evolving out of the
life-process of definite individuals, but of individuals, not as they
may appear in their own or other people's imagination, but as they
really are; i.e. as they operate, produce materially, and hence as they
work under definite material limits, presuppositions and conditions
independent of their will.

The production of ideas, of conceptions, of consciousness, is at first
directly interwoven with the material activity and the material
intercourse of men, the language of real life. Conceiving, thinking, the
mental intercourse of men, appear at this stage as the direct efflux of
their material behaviour. The same applies to mental production as
expressed in the language of politics, laws, morality, religion,
metaphysics, etc., of a people. Men are the producers of their
conceptions, ideas, etc. -- real, active men, as they are conditioned by
a definite development of their productive forces and of the intercourse
corresponding to these, up to its furthest forms. Consciousness can
never be anything else than conscious existence, and the existence of
men is their actual life-process. If in all ideology men and their
circumstances appear upside-down as in a camera obscura, this phenomenon
arises just as much from their historical life-process as the inversion
of objects on the retina does from their physical life-process.

In direct contrast to German philosophy which descends from heaven to
earth, here we ascend from earth to heaven. That is to say, we do not
set out from what men say, imagine, conceive, nor from men as narrated,
thought of, imagined, conceived, in order to arrive at men in the flesh.
We set out from real, active men, and on the basis of their real
life-process we demonstrate the development of the ideological reflexes
and echoes of this life-process. The phantoms formed in the human brain
are also, necessarily, sublimates of their material life-process, which
is empirically verifiable and bound to material premises. Morality,
religion, metaphysics, all the rest of ideology and their corresponding
forms of consciousness, thus no longer retain the semblance of
independence. They have no history, no development; but men, developing
their material production and their material intercourse, alter, along
with this their real existence, their thinking and the products of their
thinking. Life is not determined by consciousness, but consciousness by
life. In the first method of approach the starting-point is
consciousness taken as the living individual; in the second method,
which conforms to real life, it is the real living individuals
themselves, and consciousness is considered solely as their
consciousness.

This method of approach is not devoid of premises. It starts out from
the real premises and does not abandon them for a moment. Its premises
are men, not in any fantastic isolation and rigidity, but in their
actual, empirically perceptible process of development under definite
conditions. As soon as this active life-process is described, history
ceases to be a collection of dead facts as it is with the empiricists
(themselves still abstract), or an imagined activity of imagined
subjects, as with the idealists.

Where speculation ends -- in real life -- there real, positive science
begins: the representation of the practical activity, of the practical
process of development of men. Empty talk about consciousness ceases,
and real knowledge has to take its place. When reality is depicted,
philosophy as an independent branch of knowledge loses its medium of
existence. At the best its place can only be taken by a summing-up of
the most general results, abstractions which arise from the observation
of the historical development of men. Viewed apart from real history,
these abstractions have in themselves no value whatsoever. They can only
serve to facilitate the arrangement of historical material, to indicate
the sequence of its separate strata. But they by no means afford a
recipe or schema, as does philosophy, for neatly trimming the epochs of
history. On the contrary, our difficulties begin only when we set about
the observation and the arrangement -- the real depiction -- of our
historical material, whether of a past epoch or of the present. The
removal of these difficulties is governed by premises which it is quite
impossible to state here, but which only the study of the actual
life-process and the activity of the individuals of each epoch will make
evident. We shall select here some of these abstractions, which we use
in contradistinction to the ideologists, and shall illustrate them by
historical examples.

### History: Fundamental Conditions

Since we are dealing with the Germans, who are devoid of premises, we
must begin by stating the first premise of all human existence and,
therefore, of all history, the premise, namely, that men must be in a
position to live in order to be able to "make history." But life
involves before everything else eating and drinking, a habitation,
clothing and many other things. The first historical act is thus the
production of the means to satisfy these needs, the production of
material life itself. And indeed this is an historical act, a
fundamental condition of all history, which today, as thousands of years
ago, must daily and hourly be fulfilled merely in order to sustain human
life. Even when the sensuous world is reduced to a minimum, to a stick
as with Saint Bruno [Bauer], it presupposes the action of producing the
stick. Therefore in any interpretation of history one has first of all
to observe this fundamental fact in all its significance and all its
implications and to accord it its due importance. It is well known that
the Germans have never done this, and they have never, therefore, had an
earthly basis for history and consequently never an historian. The
French and the English, even if they have conceived the relation of this
fact with so-called history only in an extremely one-sided fashion,
particularly as long as they remained in the toils of political
ideology, have nevertheless made the first attempts to give the writing
of history a materialistic basis by being the first to write histories
of civil society, of commerce and industry.

The second point is that the satisfaction of the first need (the action
of satisfying, and the instrument of satisfaction which has been
acquired) leads to new needs; and this production of new needs is the
first historical act. Here we recognise immediately the spiritual
ancestry of the great historical wisdom of the Germans who, when they
run out of positive material and when they can serve up neither
theological nor political nor literary rubbish, assert that this is not
history at all, but the "prehistoric era." They do not, however,
enlighten us as to how we proceed from this nonsensical "prehistory" to
history proper; although, on the other hand, in their historical
speculation they seize upon this "prehistory" with especial eagerness
because they imagine themselves safe there from interference on the part
of "crude facts," and, at the same time, because there they can give
full rein to their speculative impulse and set up and knock down
hypotheses by the thousand.

The third circumstance which, from the very outset, enters into
historical development, is that men, who daily remake their own life,
begin to make other men, to propagate their kind: the relation between
man and woman, parents and children, the family. The family, which to
begin with is the only social relationship, becomes later, when
increased needs create new social relations and the increased population
new needs, a subordinate one (except in Germany), and must then be
treated and analysed according to the existing empirical data, not
according to "the concept of the family," as is the custom in
Germany.^[The building of houses. With savages each family has as a
matter of course its own cave or hut like the separate family tent of
the nomads. This separate domestic economy is made only the more
necessary by the further development of private property. With the
agricultural peoples a communal domestic economy is just as impossible
as a communal cultivation of the soil. A great advance was the building
of towns. In all previous periods, however, the abolition of individual
economy, which is inseparable from the abolition of private property,
was impossible for the simple reason that the material conditions
governing it were not present. The setting-up of a communal domestic
economy presupposes the development of machinery, of the use of natural
forces and of many other productive forces -- e.g. of water-supplies, of
gas-lighting, steam-heating, etc., the removal [of the antagonism] of
town and country. Without these conditions a communal economy would not
in itself form a new productive force; lacking any material basis and
resting on a purely theoretical foundation, it would be a mere freak and
would end in nothing more than a monastic economy -- What was possible
can be seen in the towns brought about by condensation and the erection
of communal buildings for various definite purposes (prisons, barracks,
etc.). That the abolition of individual economy is inseparable from the
abolition of the family is self-evident] These three aspects of social
activity are not of course to be taken as three different stages, but
just as three aspects or, to make it clear to the Germans, three
"moments," which have existed simultaneously since the dawn of history
and the first men, and which still assert themselves in history today.

The production of life, both of one's own in labour and of fresh life in
procreation, now appears as a double relationship: on the one hand as a
natural, on the other as a social relationship. By social we understand
the co-operation of several individuals, no matter under what
conditions, in what manner and to what end. It follows from this that a
certain mode of production, or industrial stage, is always combined with
a certain mode of co-operation, or social stage, and this mode of
co-operation is itself a "productive force." Further, that the multitude
of productive forces accessible to men determines the nature of society,
hence, that the "history of humanity" must always be studied and treated
in relation to the history of industry and exchange. But it is also
clear how in Germany it is impossible to write this sort of history,
because the Germans lack not only the necessary power of comprehension
and the material but also the "evidence of their senses," for across the
Rhine you cannot have any experience of these things since history has
stopped happening. Thus it is quite obvious from the start that there
exists a materialistic connection of men with one another, which is
determined by their needs and their mode of production, and which is as
old as men themselves. This connection is ever taking on new forms, and
thus presents a "history" independently of the existence of any
political or religious nonsense which in addition may hold men together.

Only now, after having considered four moments, four aspects of the
primary historical relationships, do we find that man also possesses
"consciousness," but, even so, not inherent, not "pure" consciousness.
From the start the "spirit" is afflicted with the curse of being
"burdened" with matter, which here makes its appearance in the form of
agitated layers of air, sounds, in short, of language. Language is as
old as consciousness, language is practical consciousness that exists
also for other men, and for that reason alone it really exists for me
personally as well; language, like consciousness, only arises from the
need, the necessity, of intercourse with other men. Where there exists a
relationship, it exists for me: the animal does not enter into
"relations" with anything, it does not enter into any relation at all.
For the animal, its relation to others does not exist as a relation.
Consciousness is, therefore, from the very beginning a social product,
and remains so as long as men exist at all. Consciousness is at first,
of course, merely consciousness concerning the immediate sensuous
environment and consciousness of the limited connection with other
persons and things outside the individual who is growing self-conscious.
At the same time it is consciousness of nature, which first appears to
men as a completely alien, all-powerful and unassailable force, with
which men's relations are purely animal and by which they are overawed
like beasts; it is thus a purely animal consciousness of nature (natural
religion) just because nature is as yet hardly modified historically.
(We see here immediately: this natural religion or this particular
relation of men to nature is determined by the form of society and vice
versa. Here, as everywhere, the identity of nature and man appears in
such a way that the restricted relation of men to nature determines
their restricted relation to one another, and their restricted relation
to one another determines men's restricted relation to nature.) On the
other hand, man's consciousness of the necessity of associating with the
individuals around him is the beginning of the consciousness that he is
living in society at all. This beginning is as animal as social life
itself at this stage. It is mere herd-consciousness, and at this point
man is only distinguished from sheep by the fact that with him
consciousness takes the place of instinct or that his instinct is a
conscious one. This sheep-like or tribal consciousness receives its
further development and extension through increased productivity, the
increase of needs, and, what is fundamental to both of these, the
increase of population. With these there develops the division of
labour, which was originally nothing but the division of labour in the
sexual act, then that division of labour which develops spontaneously or
"naturally" by virtue of natural predisposition (e.g. physical
strength), needs, accidents, etc. etc. Division of labour only becomes
truly such from the moment when a division of material and mental labour
appears. (The first form of ideologists, priests, is concurrent.) From
this moment onwards consciousness can really flatter itself that it is
something other than consciousness of existing practice, that it really
represents something without representing something real; from now on
consciousness is in a position to emancipate itself from the world and
to proceed to the formation of "pure" theory, theology, philosophy,
ethics, etc. But even if this theory, theology, philosophy, ethics, etc.
comes into contradiction with the existing relations, this can only
occur because existing social relations have come into contradiction
with existing forces of production; this, moreover, can also occur in a
particular national sphere of relations through the appearance of the
contradiction, not within the national orbit, but between this national
consciousness and the practice of other nations, i.e. between the
national and the general consciousness of a nation (as we see it now in
Germany).

Moreover, it is quite immaterial what consciousness starts to do on its
own: out of all such muck we get only the one inference that these three
moments, the forces of production, the state of society, and
consciousness, can and must come into contradiction with one another,
because the division of labour implies the possibility, nay the fact
that intellectual and material activity -- enjoyment and labour,
production and consumption -- devolve on different individuals, and that
the only possibility of their not coming into contradiction lies in the
negation in its turn of the division of labour. It is self-evident,
moreover, that "spectres," "bonds," "the higher being," "concept,"
"scruple," are merely the idealistic, spiritual expression, the
conception apparently of the isolated individual, the image of very
empirical fetters and limitations, within which the mode of production
of life and the form of intercourse coupled with it move.

### Private Property and Communism

With the division of labour, in which all these contradictions are
implicit, and which in its turn is based on the natural division of
labour in the family and the separation of society into individual
families opposed to one another, is given simultaneously the
distribution, and indeed the unequal distribution, both quantitative and
qualitative, of labour and its products, hence property: the nucleus,
the first form, of which lies in the family, where wife and children are
the slaves of the husband. This latent slavery in the family, though
still very crude, is the first property, but even at this early stage it
corresponds perfectly to the definition of modern economists who call it
the power of disposing of the labour-power of others. Division of labour
and private property are, moreover, identical expressions: in the one
the same thing is affirmed with reference to activity as is affirmed in
the other with reference to the product of the activity.

Further, the division of labour implies the contradiction between the
interest of the separate individual or the individual family and the
communal interest of all individuals who have intercourse with one
another. And indeed, this communal interest does not exist merely in the
imagination, as the "general interest," but first of all in reality, as
the mutual interdependence of the individuals among whom the labour is
divided. And finally, the division of labour offers us the first example
of how, as long as man remains in natural society, that is, as long as a
cleavage exists between the particular and the common interest, as long,
therefore, as activity is not voluntarily, but naturally, divided, man's
own deed becomes an alien power opposed to him, which enslaves him
instead of being controlled by him. For as soon as the distribution of
labour comes into being, each man has a particular, exclusive sphere of
activity, which is forced upon him and from which he cannot escape. He
is a hunter, a fisherman, a herdsman, or a critical critic, and must
remain so if he does not want to lose his means of livelihood; while in
communist society, where nobody has one exclusive sphere of activity but
each can become accomplished in any branch he wishes, society regulates
the general production and thus makes it possible for me to do one thing
today and another tomorrow, to hunt in the morning, fish in the
afternoon, rear cattle in the evening, criticise after dinner, just as I
have a mind, without ever becoming hunter, fisherman, herdsman or
critic. This fixation of social activity, this consolidation of what we
ourselves produce into an objective power above us, growing out of our
control, thwarting our expectations, bringing to naught our
calculations, is one of the chief factors in historical development up
till now.^[And out of this very contradiction between the interest of
the individual and that of the community the latter takes an independent
form as the State, divorced from the real interests of individual and
community, and at the same time as an illusory communal life, always
based, however, on the real ties existing in every family and tribal
conglomeration -- such as flesh and blood, language, division of labour
on a larger scale, and other interests -- and especially, as we shall
enlarge upon later, on the classes, already determined by the division
of labour, which in every such mass of men separate out, and of which
one dominates all the others. It follows from this that all struggles
within the State, the struggle between democracy, aristocracy, and
monarchy, the struggle for the franchise, etc., etc., are merely the
illusory forms in which the real struggles of the different classes are
fought out among one another (of this the German theoreticians have not
the faintest inkling, although they have received a sufficient
introduction to the subject in the Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher and
Die heilige Familie). Further, it follows that every class which is
struggling for mastery, even when its domination, as is the case with
the proletariat, postulates the abolition of the old form of society in
its entirety and of domination itself, must first conquer for itself
political power in order to represent its interest in turn as the
general interest, which in the first moment it is forced to do. Just
because individuals seek only their particular interest, which for them
does not coincide with their communal interest (in fact the general is
the illusory form of communal life), the latter will be imposed on them
as an interest "alien" to them, and "independent" of them as in its turn
a particular, peculiar "general" interest; or they themselves must
remain within this discord, as in democracy. On the other hand, too, the
practical struggle of these particular interests, which constantly
really run counter to the communal and illusory communal interests,
makes practical intervention and control necessary through the illusory
"general" interest in the form of the State.]

The social power, i.e., the multiplied productive force, which arises
through the co-operation of different individuals as it is determined by
the division of labour, appears to these individuals, since their
co-operation is not voluntary but has come about naturally, not as their
own united power, but as an alien force existing outside them, of the
origin and goal of which they are ignorant, which they thus cannot
control, which on the contrary passes through a peculiar series of
phases and stages independent of the will and the action of man, nay
even being the prime governor of these.

How otherwise could, for instance, property have had a history at all,
have taken on different forms, and landed property, for example,
according to the different premises given, have proceeded in France from
parcellation to centralisation in the hands of a few, in England from
centralisation in the hands of a few to parcellation, as is actually the
case today? Or how does it happen that trade, which after all is nothing
more than the exchange of products of various individuals and countries,
rules the whole world through the relation of supply and demand -- a
relation which, as an English economist says, hovers over the earth like
the fate of the ancients, and with invisible hand allots fortune and
misfortune to men, sets up empires and overthrows empires, causes
nations to rise and to disappear -- while with the abolition of the
basis of private property, with the communistic regulation of production
(and, implicit in this, the destruction of the alien relation between
men and what they themselves produce), the power of the relation of
supply and demand is dissolved into nothing, and men get exchange,
production, the mode of their mutual relation, under their own control
again?

## History as a Continuous Process

In history up to the present it is certainly an empirical fact that
separate individuals have, with the broadening of their activity into
world-historical activity, become more and more enslaved under a power
alien to them (a pressure which they have conceived of as a dirty trick
on the part of the so-called universal spirit, etc.), a power which has
become more and more enormous and, in the last instance, turns out to be
the world market. But it is just as empirically established that, by the
overthrow of the existing state of society by the communist revolution
(of which more below) and the abolition of private property which is
identical with it, this power, which so baffles the German
theoreticians, will be dissolved; and that then the liberation of each
single individual will be accomplished in the measure in which history
becomes transformed into world history. From the above it is clear that
the real intellectual wealth of the individual depends entirely on the
wealth of his real connections. Only then will the separate individuals
be liberated from the various national and local barriers, be brought
into practical connection with the material and intellectual production
of the whole world and be put in a position to acquire the capacity to
enjoy this all-sided production of the whole earth (the creations of
man). All-round dependence, this natural form of the world-historical
co-operation of individuals, will be transformed by this communist
revolution into the control and conscious mastery of these powers,
which, born of the action of men on one another, have till now overawed
and governed men as powers completely alien to them. Now this view can
be expressed again in speculative-idealistic, i.e. fantastic, terms as
"self-generation of the species" ("society as the subject"), and thereby
the consecutive series of interrelated individuals connected with each
other can be conceived as a single individual, which accomplishes the
mystery of generating itself. It is clear here that individuals
certainly make one another, physically and mentally, but do not make
themselves.

### Development of the Productive Forces as a Material Premise of Communism

This "alienation" (to use a term which will be comprehensible to the
philosophers) can, of course, only be abolished given two practical
premises. For it to become an "intolerable" power, i.e. a power against
which men make a revolution, it must necessarily have rendered the great
mass of humanity "propertyless," and produced, at the same time, the
contradiction of an existing world of wealth and culture, both of which
conditions presuppose a great increase in productive power, a high
degree of its development. And, on the other hand, this development of
productive forces (which itself implies the actual empirical existence
of men in their world-historical, instead of local, being) is an
absolutely necessary practical premise because without it want is merely
made general, and with destitution the struggle for necessities and all
the old filthy business would necessarily be reproduced; and
furthermore, because only with this universal development of productive
forces is a universal intercourse between men established, which
produces in all nations simultaneously the phenomenon of the
"propertyless" mass (universal competition), makes each nation dependent
on the revolutions of the others, and finally has put world-historical,
empirically universal individuals in place of local ones. Without this,
(1) communism could only exist as a local event; (2) the forces of
intercourse themselves could not have developed as universal, hence
intolerable powers: they would have remained home-bred conditions
surrounded by superstition; and (3) each extension of intercourse would
abolish local communism. Empirically, communism is only possible as the
act of the dominant peoples "all at once" and simultaneously, which
presupposes the universal development of productive forces and the world
intercourse bound up with communism. Moreover, the mass of propertyless
workers -- the utterly precarious position of labour -- power on a mass
scale cut off from capital or from even a limited satisfaction and,
therefore, no longer merely temporarily deprived of work itself as a
secure source of life -- presupposes the world market through
competition. The proletariat can thus only exist world-historically,
just as communism, its activity, can only have a "world-historical"
existence. World-historical existence of individuals means existence of
individuals which is directly linked up with world history.

Communism is for us not a state of affairs which is to be established,
an ideal to which reality [will] have to adjust itself. We call
communism the real movement which abolishes the present state of things.
The conditions of this movement result from the premises now in
existence.

In the main we have so far considered only one aspect of human activity,
the reshaping of nature by men. The other aspect, the reshaping of men
by men ... [Intercourse and productive power]

Origin of the state and the relation of the state to civil society. ...

# The Illusion of the Epoch

### Civil Society and the Conception of History

The form of intercourse determined by the existing productive forces at
all previous historical stages, and in its turn determining these, is
civil society. The latter, as is clear from what we have said above, has
as its premises and basis the simple family and the multiple, the
so-called tribe, the more precise determinants of this society are
enumerated in our remarks above. Already here we see how this civil
society is the true source and theatre of all history, and how absurd is
the conception of history held hitherto, which neglects the real
relationships and confines itself to high-sounding dramas of princes and
states.

Civil society embraces the whole material intercourse of individuals
within a definite stage of the development of productive forces. It
embraces the whole commercial and industrial life of a given stage and,
insofar, transcends the State and the nation, though, on the other hand
again, it must assert itself in its foreign relations as nationality,
and inwardly must organise itself as State. The word "civil society"
[bürgerliche Gesellschaft] emerged in the eighteenth century, when
property relationships had already extricated themselves from the
ancient and medieval communal society. Civil society as such only
develops with the bourgeoisie; the social organisation evolving directly
out of production and commerce, which in all ages forms the basis of the
State and of the rest of the idealistic superstructure, has, however,
always been designated by the same name.

## Conclusions from the Materialist Conception of History

History is nothing but the succession of the separate generations, each
of which exploits the materials, the capital funds, the productive
forces handed down to it by all preceding generations, and thus, on the
one hand, continues the traditional activity in completely changed
circumstances and, on the other, modifies the old circumstances with a
completely changed activity. This can be speculatively distorted so that
later history is made the goal of earlier history, e.g. the goal
ascribed to the discovery of America is to further the eruption of the
French Revolution. Thereby history receives its own special aims and
becomes "a person rating with other persons" (to wit:
"Self-Consciousness, Criticism, the Unique," etc.), while what is
designated with the words "destiny," "goal," "germ," or "idea" of
earlier history is nothing more than an abstraction formed from later
history, from the active influence which earlier history exercises on
later history.

The further the separate spheres, which interact on one another, extend
in the course of this development, the more the original isolation of
the separate nationalities is destroyed by the developed mode of
production and intercourse and the division of labour between various
nations naturally brought forth by these, the more history becomes world
history. Thus, for instance, if in England a machine is invented, which
deprives countless workers of bread in India and China, and overturns
the whole form of existence of these empires, this invention becomes a
world-historical fact. Or again, take the case of sugar and coffee which
have proved their world-historical importance in the nineteenth century
by the fact that the lack of these products, occasioned by the
Napoleonic Continental System, caused the Germans to rise against
Napoleon, and thus became the real basis of the glorious Wars of
liberation of 1813. From this it follows that this transformation of
history into world history is not indeed a mere abstract act on the part
of the "self-consciousness," the world spirit, or of any other
metaphysical spectre, but a quite material, empirically verifiable act,
an act the proof of which every individual furnishes as he comes and
goes, eats, drinks and clothes himself.

### Summary of the Materialist Conception of History

This conception of history depends on our ability to expound the real
process of production, starting out from the material production of life
itself, and to comprehend the form of intercourse connected with this
and created by this mode of production (i.e. civil society in its
various stages), as the basis of all history; and to show it in its
action as State, to explain all the different theoretical products and
forms of consciousness, religion, philosophy, ethics, etc. etc. and
trace their origins and growth from that basis; by which means, of
course, the whole thing can be depicted in its totality (and therefore,
too, the reciprocal action of these various sides on one another). It
has not, like the idealistic view of history, in every period to look
for a category, but remains constantly on the real ground of history; it
does not explain practice from the idea but explains the formation of
ideas from material practice; and accordingly it comes to the conclusion
that all forms and products of consciousness cannot be dissolved by
mental criticism, by resolution into "self-consciousness" or
transformation into "apparitions," "spectres," "fancies," etc. but only
by the practical overthrow of the actual social relations which gave
rise to this idealistic humbug; that not criticism but revolution is the
driving force of history, also of religion, of philosophy and all other
types of theory. It shows that history does not end by being resolved
into "self-consciousness as spirit of the spirit," but that in it at
each stage there is found a material result: a sum of productive forces,
an historically created relation of individuals to nature and to one
another, which is handed down to each generation from its predecessor; a
mass of productive forces, capital funds and conditions, which, on the
one hand, is indeed modified by the new generation, but also on the
other prescribes for it its conditions of life and gives it a definite
development, a special character. It shows that circumstances make men
just as much as men make circumstances.

This sum of productive forces, capital funds and social forms of
intercourse, which every individual and generation finds in existence as
something given, is the real basis of what the philosophers have
conceived as "substance" and "essence of man," and what they have
deified and attacked; a real basis which is not in the least disturbed,
in its effect and influence on the development of men, by the fact that
these philosophers revolt against it as "self-consciousness" and the
"Unique." These conditions of life, which different generations find in
existence, decide also whether or not the periodically recurring
revolutionary convulsion will be strong enough to overthrow the basis of
the entire existing system. And if these material elements of a complete
revolution are not present (namely, on the one hand the existing
productive forces, on the other the formation of a revolutionary mass,
which revolts not only against separate conditions of society up till
then, but against the very "production of life" till then, the "total
activity" on which it was based), then, as far as practical development
is concerned, it is absolutely immaterial whether the idea of this
revolution has been expressed a hundred times already, as the history of
communism proves.

### The Inconsistency of the Idealist Conception of History in General, and of German Post-Hegelian Philosophy in Particular

In the whole conception of history up to the present this real basis of
history has either been totally neglected or else considered as a minor
matter quite irrelevant to the course of history. History must,
therefore, always be written according to an extraneous standard; the
real production of life seems to be primeval history, while the truly
historical appears to be separated from ordinary life, something
extra-superterrestrial. With this the relation of man to nature is
excluded from history and hence the antithesis of nature and history is
created. The exponents of this conception of history have consequently
only been able to see in history the political actions of princes and
States, religious and all sorts of theoretical struggles, and in
particular in each historical epoch have had to share the illusion of
that epoch. For instance, if an epoch imagines itself to be actuated by
purely "political" or "religious" motives, although "religion" and
"politics" are only forms of its true motives, the historian accepts
this opinion. The "idea," the "conception" of the people in question
about their real practice, is transformed into the sole determining,
active force, which controls and determines their practice. When the
crude form in which the division of labour appears with the Indians and
Egyptians calls forth the caste-system in their State and religion, the
historian believes that the caste-system is the power which has produced
this crude social form.

While the French and the English at least hold by the political
illusion, which is moderately close to reality, the Germans move in the
realm of the "pure spirit," and make religious illusion the driving
force of history. The Hegelian philosophy of history is the last
consequence, reduced to its "finest expression," of all this German
historiography, for which it is not a question of real, nor even of
political, interests, but of pure thoughts, which consequently must
appear to Saint Bruno as a series of "thoughts" that devour one another
and are finally swallowed up in "self-consciousness." -- and even more
consistently the course of history must appear to Saint Max Stirner, who
knows not a thing about real history, as a mere "tale of knights,
robbers and ghosts,"^[An allusion to a type of light literature which
was widely read at the end of the 18th and the beginning of the 19th
century; many of its characters were knights, robbers and ghosts, e.g.,
Abällino, der grosse Bandit by Heinrich Daniel Zschokke published in
1793, and Rinaldo Rinaldini, der Räuberhauptmann by Christian August
Vulpius (1797).] from whose visions he can, of course, only save himself
by "unholiness". This conception is truly religious: it postulates
religious man as the primitive man, the starting-point of history, and
in its imagination puts the religious production of fancies in the place
of the real production of the means of subsistence and of life itself.

This whole conception of history, together with its dissolution and the
scruples and qualms resulting from it, is a purely national affair of
the Germans and has merely local interest for Germany, as for instance
the important question which has been under discussion in recent times:
how exactly one "passes from the realm of God to the realm of Man" -- as
if this "realm of God" had ever existed anywhere save in the
imagination, and the learned gentlemen, without being aware of it, were
not constantly living in the "realm of Man" to which they are now
seeking the way; and as if the learned pastime (for it is nothing more)
of explaining the mystery of this theoretical bubble-blowing did not on
the contrary lie in demonstrating its origin in actual earthly
relations. For these Germans, it is altogether simply a matter of
resolving the ready-made nonsense they find into some other freak, i.e.,
of presupposing that all this nonsense has a special sense which can be
discovered; while really it is only a question of explaining these
theoretical phrases from the actual existing relations. The real,
practical dissolution of these phrases, the removal of these notions
from the consciousness of men, will, as we have already said, be
effected by altered circumstances, not by theoretical deductions. For
the mass of men, i.e., the proletariat, these theoretical notions do not
exist and hence do not require to be dissolved, and if this mass ever
had any theoretical notions, e.g., religion, these have now long been
dissolved by circumstances.

The purely national character of these questions and solutions is
moreover shown by the fact that these theorists believe in all
seriousness that chimeras like "the God-Man," "Man," etc., have presided
over individual epochs of history (Saint Bruno even goes so far as to
assert that only "criticism and critics have made history," and when
they themselves construct historical systems, they skip over all earlier
periods in the greatest haste and pass immediately from "Mongolism" to
history "with meaningful content," that is to say, to the history, of
the Hallische and Deutsche Jahrbücher and the dissolution of the
Hegelian school into a general squabble. They forget all other nations,
all real events, and the theatrum mundi is confined to the Leipzig book
fair and the mutual quarrels of "criticism," [Bruno Bauer] "man,"
[Ludwig Feuerbach] and "the unique". [Max Stirner] If for once these
theorists treat really historical subjects, as for instance the
eighteenth century, they merely give a history of ideas, separated from
the facts and the practical development underlying them; and even that
merely in order to represent that period as an imperfect preliminary
stage, the as yet limited predecessor of the truly historical age, i.e.,
the period of the German philosophic struggle from 1840 to 1844. As
might be expected when the history of an earlier period is written with
the aim of accentuating the brilliance of an unhistoric person and his
fantasies, all the really historic events, even the really historic
interventions of politics in history, receive no mention. Instead we get
a narrative based not on research but on arbitrary constructions and
literary gossip, such as Saint Bruno provided in his now forgotten
history of the eighteenth century. These pompous and arrogant hucksters
of ideas, who imagine themselves infinitely exalted above all national
prejudices, are thus in practice far more national than the
beer-swilling philistines who dream of a united Germany. They do not
recognise the deeds of other nations as historical; they live in
Germany, within Germany 1281 and for Germany; they turn the
Rhine-song^[Rhine-song ("Der deutsche Rhein") -- a poem by Nicolaus
Becker which was widely used by nationalists in their own interest. It
was written in 1840 and set to music by several composers.] into a
religious hymn and conquer Alsace and Lorraine by robbing French
philosophy instead of the French state, by Germanising French ideas
instead of French provinces. Herr Venedey is a cosmopolitan compared
with the Saints Bruno and Max, who, in the universal dominance of
theory, proclaim the universal dominance of Germany.

### Feuerbach: Philosophic, and Real, Liberation

[...] It is also clear from these arguments how grossly Feuerbach is
deceiving himself when (Wigand's Vierteljahrsschrift, 1845, Band 2) by
virtue of the qualification "common man" he declares himself a
communist,[26] transforms the latter into a predicate of "man," and
thereby thinks it possible to change the word "communist," which in the
real world means the follower of a definite revolutionary party, into a
mere category. Feuerbach's whole deduction with regard to the relation
of men to one another goes only so far as to prove that men need and
always have needed each other. He wants to establish consciousness of
this fact, that is to say, like the other theorists, merely to produce a
correct consciousness about an existing fact; whereas for the real
communist it is a question of overthrowing the existing state of things.
We thoroughly appreciate, moreover, that Feuerbach, in endeavouring to
produce consciousness of just this fact, is going as far as a theorist
possibly can, without ceasing to be a theorist and philosopher...

As an example of Feuerbach's acceptance and at the same time
misunderstanding of existing reality, which he still shares with our
opponents, we recall the passage in the Philosophie der Zukunft where he
develops the view that the existence of a thing or a man is at the same
time its or his essence, that the conditions of existence, the mode of
life and activity of an animal or human individual are those in which
its "essence" feels itself satisfied. Here every exception is expressly
conceived as an unhappy chance, as an abnormality which cannot be
altered. Thus if millions of proletarians feel by no means contented
with their living conditions, if their "existence" does not in the least
correspond to their "essence," then, according to the passage quoted,
this is an unavoidable misfortune, which must be borne quietly. The
millions of proletarians and communists, however, think differently and
will prove this in time, when they bring their "existence" into harmony
with their "essence" in a practical way, by means of a revolution.
Feuerbach, therefore, never speaks of the world of man in such cases,
but always takes refuge in external nature, and moreover in nature which
has not yet been subdued by men. But every new invention, every advance
made by industry, detaches another piece from this domain, so that the
ground which produces examples illustrating such Feuerbachian
propositions is steadily shrinking.

The "essence" of the fish is its "being," water -- to go no further than
this one proposition. The "essence" of the freshwater fish is the water
of a river. But the latter ceases to be the "essence" of the fish and is
no longer a suitable medium of existence as soon as the river is made to
serve industry, as soon as it is polluted by dyes and other waste
products and navigated by steamboats, or as soon as its water is
diverted into canals where simple drainage can deprive the fish of its
medium of existence. The explanation that all such contradictions are
inevitable abnormalities does not essentially differ from the
consolation which Saint Max Stirner offers to the discontented, saving
that this contradiction is their own contradiction and this predicament
their own predicament, whereupon then, should either set their minds at
ease, keep their disgust to themselves, or revolt against it in some
fantastic way. It differs just as little from Saint Bruno's allegation
that these unfortunate circumstances are due to the fact that those
concerned are stuck in the muck of "substance," have not advanced to
"absolute self-consciousness and do not realise that these adverse
conditions are spirit of their spirit.

### Preconditions of the Real Liberation of Man

We shall, of course, not take the trouble to enlighten our wise
philosophers by explaining to them that the "liberation" of man is not
advanced a single step by reducing philosophy, theology, substance and
all the trash to "self-consciousness" and by liberating man from the
domination of these phrases, which have never held him in thrall. Nor
will we explain to them that it is only possible to achieve real
liberation in the real world and by employing real means, that slavery
cannot be abolished without the steam-engine and the mule and
spinning-jenny, serfdom cannot be abolished without improved
agriculture, and that, in general, people cannot be liberated as long as
they are unable to obtain food and drink, housing and clothing in
adequate quality and quantity. "Liberation" is an historical and not a
mental act, and it is brought about by historical conditions, the
development of industry, commerce, agriculture, the conditions of
intercourse...[There is here a gap in the manuscript]

In Germany, a country where only a trivial historical development is
taking place, these mental developments, these glorified and ineffective
trivialities, naturally serve as a substitute for the lack of historical
development, and they take root and have to be combated. But this fight
is of local importance.

### Feuerbach's Contemplative and Inconsistent Materialism

In reality and for the practical materialist, i.e. the communist, it is
a question of revolutionising the existing world, of practically
attacking and changing existing things. When occasionally we find such
views with Feuerbach, they are never more than isolated surmises and
have much too little influence on his general outlook to be considered
here as anything else than embryos capable of development. Feuerbach's
conception of the sensuous world is confined on the one hand to mere
contemplation of it, and on the other to mere feeling; he says "Man"
instead of "real historical man." "Man" is really "the German." In the
first case, the contemplation of the sensuous world, he necessarily
lights on things which contradict his consciousness and feeling, which
disturb the harmony he presupposes, the harmony of all parts of the
sensuous world and especially of man and nature. To remove this
disturbance, he must take refuge in a double perception, a profane one
which only perceives the "flatly obvious" and a higher, philosophical,
one which perceives the "true essence" of things. He does not see how
the sensuous world around him is, not a thing given direct from all
eternity, remaining ever the same, but the product of industry and of
the state of society; and, indeed, in the sense that it is an historical
product, the result of the activity of a whole succession of
generations, each standing on the shoulders of the preceding one,
developing its industry and its intercourse, modifying its social system
according to the changed needs. Even the objects of the simplest
"sensuous certainty" are only given him through social development,
industry and commercial intercourse. The cherry-tree, like almost all
fruit-trees, was, as is well known, only a few centuries ago
transplanted by commerce into our zone, and therefore only by this
action of a definite society in a definite age it has become "sensuous
certainty" for Feuerbach.

Incidentally, when we conceive things thus, as they really are and
happened, every profound philosophical problem is resolved, as will be
seen even more clearly later, quite simply into an empirical fact. For
instance, the important question of the relation of man to nature (Bruno
[Bauer] goes so far as to speak of "the antitheses in nature and
history" (p. 110), as though these were two separate "things" and man
did not always have before him an historical nature and a natural
history) out of which all the "unfathomably lofty works" on "substance"
and "self-consciousness" were born, crumbles of itself when we
understand that the celebrated "unity of man with nature" has always
existed in industry and has existed in varying forms in every epoch
according to the lesser or greater development of industry, just like
the "struggle" of man with nature, right up to the development of his
productive powers on a corresponding basis. Industry and commerce,
production and the exchange of the necessities of life, themselves
determine distribution, the structure of the different social classes
and are, in turn, determined by it as to the mode in which they are
carried on; and so it happens that in Manchester, for instance,
Feuerbach sees only factories and machines, where a hundred years ago
only spinning-wheels and weaving-rooms were to be seen, or in the
Campagna of Rome he finds only pasture lands and swamps, where in the
time of Augustus he would have found nothing but the vineyards and
villas of Roman capitalists. Feuerbach speaks in particular of the
perception of natural science; he mentions secrets which are disclosed
only to the eye of the physicist and chemist; but where would natural
science be without industry and commerce? Even this pure natural science
is provided with an aim, as with its material, only through trade and
industry, through the sensuous activity of men. So much is this
activity, this unceasing sensuous labour and creation, this production,
the basis of the whole sensuous world as it now exists, that, were it
interrupted only for a year, Feuerbach would not only find an enormous
change in the natural world, but would very soon find that the whole
world of men and his own perceptive faculty, nay his own existence, were
missing. Of course, in all this the priority of external nature remains
unassailed, and all this has no application to the original men produced
by generatio aequivoca [spontaneous generation]; but this
differentiation has meaning only insofar as man is considered to be
distinct from nature. For that matter, nature, the nature that preceded
human history, is not by any means the nature in which Feuerbach lives,
it is nature which today no longer exists anywhere (except perhaps on a
few Australian coral-islands of recent origin) and which, therefore,
does not exist for Feuerbach.

Certainly Feuerbach has a great advantage over the "pure" materialists
in that he realises how man too is an "object of the senses." But apart
from the fact that he only conceives him as an "object of the senses,
not as sensuous activity," because he still remains in the realm of
theory and conceives of men not in their given social connection, not
under their existing conditions of life, which have made them what they
are, he never arrives at the really existing active men, but stops at
the abstraction "man," and gets no further than recognising "the true,
individual, corporeal man," emotionally, i.e. he knows no other "human
relationships" "of man to man" than love and friendship, and even then
idealised. He gives no criticism of the present conditions of life. Thus
he never manages to conceive the sensuous world as the total living
sensuous activity of the individuals composing it; and therefore when,
for example, he sees instead of healthy men a crowd of scrofulous,
overworked and consumptive starvelings, he is compelled to take refuge
in the "higher perception" and in the ideal "compensation in the
species," and thus to relapse into idealism at the very point where the
communist materialist sees the necessity, and at the same time the
condition, of a transformation both of industry and of the social
structure.

As far as Feuerbach is a materialist he does not deal with history, and
as far as he considers history he is not a materialist. With him
materialism and history diverge completely, a fact which incidentally is
already obvious from what has been said.

### Ruling Class and Ruling Ideas

The ideas of the ruling class are in every epoch the ruling ideas, i.e.
the class which is the ruling material force of society, is at the same
time its ruling intellectual force. The class which has the means of
material production at its disposal, has control at the same time over
the means of mental production, so that thereby, generally speaking, the
ideas of those who lack the means of mental production are subject to
it. The ruling ideas are nothing more than the ideal expression of the
dominant material relationships, the dominant material relationships
grasped as ideas; hence of the relationships which make the one class
the ruling one, therefore, the ideas of its dominance. The individuals
composing the ruling class possess among other things consciousness, and
therefore think. Insofar, therefore, as they rule as a class and
determine the extent and compass of an epoch, it is self-evident that
they do this in its whole range, hence among other things rule also as
thinkers, as producers of ideas, and regulate the production and
distribution of the ideas of their age: thus their ideas are the ruling
ideas of the epoch. For instance, in an age and in a country where royal
power, aristocracy, and bourgeoisie are contending for mastery and
where, therefore, mastery is shared, the doctrine of the separation of
powers proves to be the dominant idea and is expressed as an "eternal
law."

The division of labour, which we already saw above as one of the chief
forces of history up till now, manifests itself also in the ruling class
as the division of mental and material labour, so that inside this class
one part appears as the thinkers of the class (its active, conceptive
ideologists, who make the perfecting of the illusion of the class about
itself their chief source of livelihood), while the others' attitude to
these ideas and illusions is more passive and receptive, because they
are in reality the active members of this class and have less time to
make up illusions and ideas about themselves. Within this class this
cleavage can even develop into a certain opposition and hostility
between the two parts, which, however, in the case of a practical
collision, in which the class itself is endangered, automatically comes
to nothing, in which case there also vanishes the semblance that the
ruling ideas were not the ideas of the ruling class and had a power
distinct from the power of this class. The existence of revolutionary
ideas in a particular period presupposes the existence of a
revolutionary class; about the premises for the latter sufficient has
already been said above.

If now in considering the course of history we detach the ideas of the
ruling class from the ruling class itself and attribute to them an
independent existence, if we confine ourselves to saying that these or
those ideas were dominant at a given time, without bothering ourselves
about the conditions of production and the producers of these ideas, if
we thus ignore the individuals and world conditions which are the source
of the ideas, we can say, for instance, that during the time that the
aristocracy was dominant, the concepts honour, loyalty, etc. were
dominant, during the dominance of the bourgeoisie the concepts freedom,
equality, etc. The ruling class itself on the whole imagines this to be
so. This conception of history, which is common to all historians,
particularly since the eighteenth century, will necessarily come up
against the phenomenon that increasingly abstract ideas hold sway, i.e.
ideas which increasingly take on the form of universality. For each new
class which puts itself in the place of one ruling before it, is
compelled, merely in order to carry through its aim, to represent its
interest as the common interest of all the members of society, that is,
expressed in ideal form: it has to give its ideas the form of
universality, and represent them as the only rational, universally valid
ones. The class making a revolution appears from the very start, if only
because it is opposed to a class, not as a class but as the
representative of the whole of society; it appears as the whole mass of
society confronting the one ruling class. It can do this because, to
start with, its interest really is more connected with the common
interest of all other non-ruling classes, because under the pressure of
hitherto existing conditions its interest has not yet been able to
develop as the particular interest of a particular class. Its victory,
therefore, benefits also many individuals of the other classes which are
not winning a dominant position, but only insofar as it now puts these
individuals in a position to raise themselves into the ruling class.
When the French bourgeoisie overthrew the power of the aristocracy, it
thereby made it possible for many proletarians to raise themselves above
the proletariat, but only insofar as they become bourgeois. Every new
class, therefore, achieves its hegemony only on a broader basis than
that of the class ruling previously, whereas the opposition of the
non-ruling class against the new ruling class later develops all the
more sharply and profoundly. Both these things determine the fact that
the struggle to be waged against this new ruling class, in its turn,
aims at a more decided and radical negation of the previous conditions
of society than could all previous classes which sought to rule.

This whole semblance, that the rule of a certain class is only the rule
of certain ideas, comes to a natural end, of course, as soon as class
rule in general ceases to be the form in which society is organised,
that is to say, as soon as it is no longer necessary to represent a
particular interest as general or the "general interest" as ruling.

Once the ruling ideas have been separated from the ruling individuals
and, above all, from the relationships which result from a given stage
of the mode of production, and in this way the conclusion has been
reached that history is always under the sway of ideas, it is very easy
to abstract from these various ideas "the idea," the notion, etc. as the
dominant force in history, and thus to understand all these separate
ideas and concepts as "forms of self-determination" on the part of the
concept developing in history. It follows then naturally, too, that all
the relationships of men can be derived from the concept of man, man as
conceived, the essence of man, Man. This has been done by the
speculative philosophers. Hegel himself confesses at the end of the
Geschichtsphilosophie that he "has considered the progress of the
concept only" and has represented in history the "true theodicy."
(p.446.) Now one can go back again to the producers of the "concept," to
the theorists, ideologists and philosophers, and one comes then to the
conclusion that the philosophers, the thinkers as such, have at all
times been dominant in history: a conclusion, as we see^[This section
formed originally part of Chapter III and followed directly after the
passage to which Marx and Engels refer here], already expressed by
Hegel. The whole trick of proving the hegemony of the spirit in history
(hierarchy Stirner calls it) is thus confined to the following three
efforts.

1. One must separate the ideas of those ruling for empirical reasons,
   under empirical conditions and as empirical individuals, from these
   actual rulers, and thus recognise the rule of ideas or illusions in
   history.
2. One must bring an order into this rule of ideas, prove a mystical
   connection among the successive ruling ideas, which is managed by
   understanding them as "acts of self-determination on the part of the
   concept" (this is possible because by virtue of their empirical basis
   these ideas are really connected with one another and because,
   conceived as mere ideas, they become self-distinctions, distinctions
   made by thought).
3. To remove the mystical appearance of this "self-determining concept"
   it is changed into a person -- "Self-Consciousness" -- or, to appear
   thoroughly materialistic, into a series of persons, who represent the
   "concept" in history, into the "thinkers," the "philosophers," the
   ideologists, who again are understood as the manufacturers of
   history, as the "council of guardians," as the rulers. Thus the whole
   body of materialistic elements has been removed from history and now
   full rein can be given to the speculative steed.

Whilst in ordinary life every shopkeeper is very well able to
distinguish between what somebody professes to be and what he really is,
our historians have not yet won even this trivial insight. They take
every epoch at its word and believe that everything it says and imagines
about itself is true.

This historical method which reigned in Germany, and especially the
reason why, must be understood from its connection with the illusion of
ideologists in general, e.g. the illusions of the jurist, politicians
(of the practical statesmen among them, too), from the dogmatic
dreamings and distortions of these fellows; this is explained perfectly
easily from their practical position in life, their job, and the
division of labour.

# The Real Basis of Ideology

### Division of Labour: Town and Country^[Four pages of the manuscript are missing here. - Ed.]

From the first there follows the premise of a highly developed division
of labour and an extensive commerce; from the second, the locality. In
the first case the individuals must be brought together; in the second
they find themselves alongside the given instrument of production as
instruments of production themselves. Here, therefore, arises the
difference between natural instruments of production and those created
by civilisation. The field (water, etc.) can be regarded as a natural
instrument of production. In the first case, that of the natural
instrument of production, individuals are subservient to nature; in the
second, to a product of labour. In the first case, therefore, property
(landed property) appears as direct natural domination, in the second,
as domination of labour, particularly of accumulated labour, capital.
The first case presupposes that the individuals are united by some bond:
family, tribe, the land itself, etc.; the second, that they are
independent of one another and are only held together by exchange. In
the first case, what is involved is chiefly an exchange between men and
nature in which the labour of the former is exchanged for the products
of the latter; in the second, it is predominantly an exchange of men
among themselves. In the first case, average, human common sense is
adequate -- physical activity is as yet not separated from mental
activity; in the second, the division between physical and mental labour
must already be practically completed. In the first case, the domination
of the proprietor over the propertyless may be based on a personal
relationship, on a kind of community; in the second, it must have taken
on a material shape in a third party -- money. In the first case, small
industry exists, but determined by the utilisation of the natural
instrument of production and therefore without the distribution of
labour among various individuals; in the second, industry exists only in
and through the division of labour.

### The Division of Material and Mental Labour. Separation of Town and Country, The Guild System

The greatest division of material and mental labour is the separation of
town and country. The antagonism between town and country begins with
the transition from barbarism to civilisation, from tribe to State, from
locality to nation, and runs through the whole history of civilisation
to the present day (the Anti-Corn Law League).

The existence of the town implies, at the same time, the necessity of
administration, police, taxes, etc.; in short, of the municipality, and
thus of politics in general. Here first became manifest the division of
the population into two great classes, which is directly based on the
division of labour and on the instruments of production. The town
already is in actual fact the concentration of the population, of the
instruments of production, of capital, of pleasures, of needs, while the
country demonstrates just the opposite fact, isolation and separation.
The antagonism between town and country can only exist within the
framework of private property. It is the most crass expression of the
subjection of the individual under the division of labour, under a
definite activity forced upon him -- a subjection which makes one man
into a restricted town-animal, the other into a restricted
country-animal, and daily creates anew the conflict between their
interests. Labour is here again the chief thing, power over individuals,
and as long as the latter exists, private property must exist. The
abolition of the antagonism between town and country is one of the first
conditions of communal life, a condition which again depends on a mass
of material premises and which cannot be fulfilled by the mere will, as
anyone can see at the first glance. (These conditions have still to be
enumerated.) The separation of town and country can also be understood
as the separation of capital and landed property, as the beginning of
the existence and development of capital independent of landed property
-- the beginning of property having its basis only in labour and
exchange.

In the towns which, in the Middle Ages, did not derive ready-made from
an earlier period but were formed anew by the serfs who had become free,
each man's own particular labour was his only property apart from the
small capital he brought with him, consisting almost solely of the most
necessary tools of his craft. The competition of serfs constantly
escaping into the town, the constant war of the country against the
towns and thus the necessity of an organised municipal military force,
the bond of common ownership in a particular kind of labour, the
necessity of common buildings for the sale of their wares at a time when
craftsmen were also traders, and the consequent exclusion of the
unauthorised from these buildings, the conflict among the interests of
the various crafts, the necessity of protecting their laboriously
acquired skill, and the feudal organisation of the whole of the country:
these were the causes of the union of the workers of each craft in
guilds. We have not at this point to go further into the manifold
modifications of the guild-system, which arise through later historical
developments. The flight of the serfs into the towns went on without
interruption right through the Middle Ages. These serfs, persecuted by
their lords in the country, came separately into the towns, where they
found an organised community, against which they were powerless and in
which they had to subject themselves to the station assigned to them by
the demand for their labour and the interest of their organised urban
competitors. These workers, entering separately, were never able to
attain to any power, since, if their labour was of the guild type which
had to be learned, the guild-masters bent them to their will and
organised them according to their interest; or if their labour was not
such as had to be learned, and therefore not of the guild type, they
became day-labourers and never managed to organise, remaining an
unorganised rabble. The need for day-labourers in the towns created the
rabble.

These towns were true "associations", called forth by the direct need,
the care of providing for the protection of property, and of multiplying
the means of production and defence of the separate members. The rabble
of these towns was devoid of any power, composed as it was of
individuals strange to one another who had entered separately, and who
stood unorganised over against an organised power, armed for war, and
jealously watching over them. The journeymen and apprentices were
organised in each craft as it best suited the interest of the masters.
The patriarchal relationship existing between them and their masters
gave the latter a double power -- on the one hand because of their
influence on the whole life of the journeymen, and on the other because,
for the journeymen who worked with the same master, it was a real bond
which held them together against the journeymen of other masters and
separated them from these. And finally, the journeymen were bound to the
existing order by their simple interest in becoming masters themselves.
While, therefore, the rabble at least carried out revolts against the
whole municipal order, revolts which remained completely ineffective
because of their powerlessness, the journeymen never got further than
small acts of insubordination within separate guilds, such as belong to
the very nature of the guild-system. The great risings of the Middle
Ages all radiated from the country, but equally remained totally
ineffective because of the isolation and consequent crudity of the
peasants.

In the towns, the division of labour between the individual guilds was
as yet [quite naturally derived] and, in the guilds themselves, not at
all developed between the individual workers. Every workman had to be
versed in a whole round of tasks, had to be able to make everything that
was to be made with his tools. The limited commerce and the scanty
communication between the individual towns, the lack of population and
the narrow needs did not allow of a higher division of labour, and
therefore every man who wished to become a master had to be proficient
in the whole of his craft. Thus there is found with medieval craftsmen
an interest in their special work and in proficiency in it, which was
capable of rising to a narrow artistic sense. For this very reason,
however, every medieval craftsman was completely absorbed in his work,
to which he had a contented, slavish relationship, and to which he was
subjected to a far greater extent than the modern worker, whose work is
a matter of indifference to him.

Capital in these towns was a naturally derived capital, consisting of a
house, the tools of the craft, and the natural, hereditary customers;
and not being realisable, on account of the backwardness of commerce and
the lack of circulation, it descended from father to son. Unlike modern
capital, which can be assessed in money and which may be indifferently
invested in this thing or that, this capital was directly connected with
the particular work of the owner, inseparable from it and to this extent
estate capital.

## Further Division of Labour

The next extension of the division of labour was the separation of
production and commerce, the formation of a special class of merchants;
a separation which, in the towns bequeathed by a former period, had been
handed down (among other things with the Jews) and which very soon
appeared in the newly formed ones. With this there was given the
possibility of commercial communications transcending the immediate
neighbourhood, a possibility, the realisation of which depended on the
existing means of communication, the state of public safety in the
countryside, which was determined by political conditions (during the
whole of the Middle Ages, as is well known, the merchants travelled in
armed caravans), and on the cruder or more advanced needs (determined by
the stage of culture attained) of the region accessible to intercourse.

With commerce the prerogative of a particular class, with the extension
of trade through the merchants beyond the immediate surroundings of the
town, there immediately appears a reciprocal action between production
and commerce. The towns enter into relations with one another, new tools
are brought from one town into the other, and the separation between
production and commerce soon calls forth a new division of production
between the individual towns, each of which is soon exploiting a
predominant branch of industry. The local restrictions of earlier times
begin gradually to be broken down.

It depends purely on the extension of commerce whether the productive
forces achieved in a locality, especially inventions, are lost for later
development or not. As long as there exists no commerce transcending the
immediate neighbourhood, every invention must be made separately in each
locality, and mere chances such as irruptions of barbaric peoples, even
ordinary wars, are sufficient to cause a country with advanced
productive forces and needs to have to start right over again from the
beginning. In primitive history every invention had to be made daily
anew and in each locality independently. How little highly developed
productive forces are safe from complete destruction, given even a
relatively very extensive commerce, is proved by the Phoenicians, whose
inventions were for the most part lost for a long time to come through
the ousting of this nation from commerce, its conquest by Alexander and
its consequent decline. Likewise, for instance, glass-painting in the
Middle Ages. Only when commerce has become world commerce and has as its
basis large-scale industry, when all nations are drawn into the
competitive struggle, is the permanence of the acquired productive
forces assured.

### The Rise of Manufacturing

The immediate consequence of the division of labour between the various
towns was the rise of manufactures, branches of production which had
outgrown the guild-system. Manufactures first flourished, in Italy and
later in Flanders, under the historical premise of commerce with foreign
nations. In other countries, England and France for example,
manufactures were at first confined to the home market. Besides the
premises already mentioned manufactures depend on an already advanced
concentration of population, particularly in the countryside, and of
capital, which began to accumulate in the hands of individuals, partly
in the guilds in spite of the guild regulations, partly among the
merchants.

That labour which from the first presupposed a machine, even of the
crudest sort, soon showed itself the most capable of development.
Weaving, earlier carried on in the country by the peasants as a
secondary occupation to procure their clothing, was the first labour to
receive an impetus and a further development through the extension of
commerce. Weaving was the first and remained the principal manufacture.
The rising demand for clothing materials, consequent on the growth of
population, the growing accumulation and mobilisation of natural capital
through accelerated circulation, the demand for luxuries called forth by
the latter and favoured generally by the gradual extension of commerce,
gave weaving a quantitative and qualitative stimulus, which wrenched it
out of the form of production hitherto existing. Alongside the peasants
weaving for their own use, who continued, and still continue, with this
sort of work, there emerged a new class of weavers in the towns, whose
fabrics were destined for the whole home market and usually for foreign
markets too.

Weaving, an occupation demanding in most cases little skill and soon
splitting up into countless branches, by its whole nature resisted the
trammels of the guild. Weaving was, therefore, carried on mostly in
villages and market-centres without guild organisation, which gradually
became towns, and indeed the most flourishing towns in each land.

With guild-free manufacture, property relations also quickly changed.
The first advance beyond naturally derived estate capital was provided
by the rise of merchants whose capital was from the beginning movable,
capital in the modern sense as far as one can speak of it, given the
circumstances of those times. The second advance came with manufacture,
which again made mobile a mass of natural capital, and altogether
increased the mass of movable capital as against that of natural
capital.

At the same time, manufacture became a refuge of the peasants from the
guilds which excluded them or paid them badly, just as earlier the
guild-towns had [served] as a refuge for the peasants from [the
oppressive landed nobility].

Simultaneously with the beginning of manufactures there was a period of
vagabondage caused by the abolition of the feudal bodies of retainers,
the disbanding of the swollen armies which had flocked to serve the
kings against their vassals, the improvement of agriculture, and the
transformation of great strips of tillage into pasture land. From this
alone it is clear how this vagabondage is strictly connected with the
disintegration of the feudal system. As early as the thirteenth century
we find isolated epochs of this kind, but only at the end of the
fifteenth and beginning of the sixteenth does this vagabondage make a
general and permanent appearance. These vagabonds, who were so numerous
that, for instance, Henry VIII of England had 72,000 of them hanged,
were only prevailed upon to work with the greatest difficulty and
through the most extreme necessity, and then only after long resistance.
The rapid rise of manufactures, particularly in England, absorbed them
gradually.

With the advent of manufactures, the various nations entered into a
competitive relationship, the struggle for trade, which was fought out
in wars, protective duties and prohibitions, whereas earlier the
nations, insofar as they were connected at all, had carried on an
inoffensive exchange with each other. Trade had from now on a political
significance.

With the advent of manufacture the relationship between worker and
employer changed. In the guilds the patriarchal relationship between
journeyman and master continued to exist; in manufacture its place was
taken by the monetary relation between worker and capitalist -- a
relationship which in the countryside and in small towns retained a
patriarchal tinge, but in the larger, the real manufacturing towns,
quite early lost almost all patriarchal complexion.

Manufacture and the movement of production in general received an
enormous impetus through the extension of commerce which came with the
discovery of America and the sea-route to the East Indies. The new
products imported thence, particularly the masses of gold and silver
which came into circulation and totally changed the position of the
classes towards one another, dealing a hard blow to feudal landed
property and to the workers; the expeditions of adventurers,
colonisation; and above all the extension of markets into a world
market, which had now become possible and was daily becoming more and
more a fact, called forth a new phase of historical development, into
which in general we cannot here enter further. Through the colonisation
of the newly discovered countries the commercial struggle of the nations
amongst one another was given new fuel and accordingly greater extension
and animosity.

The expansion of trade and manufacture accelerated the accumulation of
movable capital, while in the guilds, which were not stimulated to
extend their production, natural capital remained stationary or even
declined. Trade and manufacture created the big bourgeoisie; in the
guilds was concentrated the petty bourgeoisie, which no longer was
dominant in the towns as formerly, but had to bow to the might of the
great merchants and manufacturers. Hence the decline of the guilds, as
soon as they came into contact with manufacture.

The intercourse of nations took on, in the epoch of which we have been
speaking, two different forms. At first the small quantity of gold and
silver in circulation involved the ban on the export of these metals;
and industry, for the most part imported from abroad and made necessary
by the need for employing the growing urban population, could not do
without those privileges which could be granted not only, of course,
against home competition, but chiefly against foreign. The local guild
privilege was in these original prohibitions extended over the whole
nation. Customs duties originated from the tributes which the feudal
lords exacted as protective levies against robbery from merchants
passing through their territories, tributes later imposed likewise by
the towns, and which, with the rise of the modern states, were the
Treasury's most obvious means of raising money.

The appearance of American gold and silver on the European markets, the
gradual development of industry, the rapid expansion of trade and the
consequent rise of the non-guild bourgeoisie and of money, gave these
measures another significance. The State, which was daily less and less
able to do without money, now retained the ban on the export of gold and
silver out of fiscal considerations; the bourgeois, for whom these
masses of money which were hurled onto the market became the chief
object of speculative buying, were thoroughly content with this;
privileges established earlier became a source of income for the
government and were sold for money; in the customs legislation there
appeared the export duty, which, since it only [placed] a hindrance in
the way of industry, had a purely fiscal aim.

The second period began in the middle of the seventeenth century and
lasted almost to the end of the eighteenth. Commerce and navigation had
expanded more rapidly than manufacture, which played a secondary role;
the colonies were becoming considerable consumers; and after long
struggles the separate nations shared out the opening world market among
themselves. This period begins with the Navigation Laws^[Navigation Laws
-- a series of Acts passed in England from 1381 onwards to protect
English shipping against foreign companies. The Navigation Laws were
modified in the early nineteenth century and repealed in 1849 except for
a reservation regarding coasting trade, which was revoked in 1854.] and
colonial monopolies. The competition of the nations among themselves was
excluded as far as possible by tariffs, prohibitions and treaties; and
in the last resort the competitive struggle was carried on and decided
by wars (especially naval wars). The mightiest maritime nation, the
English, retained preponderance in trade and manufacture. Here, already,
we find concentration in one country.

Manufacture was all the time sheltered by protective duties in the home
market, by monopolies in the colonial market, and abroad as much as
possible by differential duties. The working-up of home-produced
material was encouraged (wool and linen in England, silk in France), the
export of home-produced raw material forbidden (wool in England), and
the [working-up] of imported material neglected or suppressed (cotton in
England). The nation dominant in sea trade and colonial power naturally
secured for itself also the greatest quantitative and qualitative
expansion of manufacture. Manufacture could not be carried on without
protection, since, if the slightest change takes place in other
countries, it can lose its market and be ruined; under reasonably
favourable conditions it may easily be introduced into a country, but
for this very reason can easily be destroyed. At the same time through
the mode in which it is carried on, particularly in the eighteenth
century, in the countryside, it is to such an extent interwoven with the
vital relationships of a great mass of individuals, that no country dare
jeopardise its existence by permitting free competition. Insofar as it
manages to export, it therefore depends entirely on the extension or
restriction of commerce, and exercises a relatively very small reaction
[on the latter]. Hence its secondary [importance] and the influence of
[the merchants] in the eighteenth century. It was the merchants and
especially the shippers who more than anybody else pressed for State
protection and monopolies; the manufacturers also demanded and indeed
received protection, but all the time were inferior in political
importance to the merchants. The commercial towns, particularly the
maritime towns, became to some extent civilised and acquired the outlook
of the big bourgeoisie, but in the factory towns an extreme
petty-bourgeois outlook persisted. Cf Aikin,^[The movement of capital,
although considerably accelerated, still remained, however, relatively
slow. The splitting-up of the world market into separate parts, each of
which was exploited by a particular nation, the exclusion of competition
among themselves on the part of the nations, the clumsiness of
production itself and the fact that finance was only evolving from its
early stages, greatly impeded circulation. The consequence of this was a
haggling, mean and niggardly spirit which still clung to all merchants
and to the whole mode of carrying on trade. Compared with the
manufacturers, and above all with the craftsmen, they were certainly big
bourgeois; compared with the merchants and industrialists of the next
period they remain petty bourgeois. Cf. Adam Smith.] etc. The eighteenth
century was the century of trade. Pinto says this expressly: "Le
commerce fait la marotte du siècle" ["Commerce is the rage of the
century."]; and: "Depuis quelque temps il n'est plus question que de
commerce, de navgation et de marine." ["For some time now people have
been talking only about commerce, navigation and the navy."]

This period is also characterised by the cessation of the bans on the
export of gold and silver and the beginning of the trade in money; by
banks, national debts, paper money; by speculation in stocks and shares
and stockjobbing in all articles; by the development of finance in
general. Again capital lost a great part of the natural character which
had still clung to it.

## Most Extensive Division of Labour. Large-Scale Industry

The concentration of trade and manufacture in one country, England,
developing irresistibly in the seventeenth century, gradually created
for this country a relative world market, and thus a demand for the
manufactured products of this country, which could no longer be met by
the industrial productive forces hitherto existing. This demand,
outgrowing the productive forces, was the motive power which, by
producing big industry -- the application of elemental forces to
industrial ends, machinery and the most complex division of labour --
called into existence the third period of private ownership since the
Middle Ages. There already existed in England the other pre-conditions
of this new phase: freedom of competition inside the nation, the
development of theoretical mechanics, etc. (Indeed, the science of
mechanics perfected by Newton was altogether the most popular science in
France and England in the eighteenth century.) (Free competition inside
the nation itself had everywhere to be conquered by a revolution -- 1640
and 1688 in England, 1789 in France.)

Competition soon compelled every country that wished to retain its
historical role to protect its manufactures by renewed customs
regulations (the old duties were no longer any good against big
industry) and soon after to introduce big industry under protective
duties. Big industry universalised competition in spite of these
protective measures (it is practical free trade; the protective duty is
only a palliative, a measure of defence within free trade), established
means of communication and the modern world market, subordinated trade
to itself, transformed all capital into industrial capital, and thus
produced the rapid circulation (development of the financial system) and
the centralisation of capital. By universal competition it forced all
individuals to strain their energy to the utmost. It destroyed as far as
possible ideology, religion, morality, etc. and where it could not do
this, made them into a palpable lie. It produced world history for the
first time, insofar as it made all civilised nations and every
individual member of them dependent for the satisfaction of their wants
on the whole world, thus destroying the former natural exclusiveness of
separate nations. It made natural science subservient to capital and
took from the division of labour the last semblance of its natural
character. It destroyed natural growth in general, as far as this is
possible while labour exists, and resolved all natural relationships
into money relationships. In the place of naturally grown towns it
created the modern, large industrial cities which have sprung up
overnight. Wherever it penetrated, it destroyed the crafts and all
earlier stages of industry. It completed the victory of the commercial
town over the countryside. [Its first premise] was the automatic system.
[Its development] produced a mass of productive forces, for which
private [property] became just as much a fetter as the guild had been
for manufacture and the small, rural workshop for the developing craft.
These productive forces received under the system of private property a
one-sided development only, and became for the majority destructive
forces; moreover, a great multitude of such forces could find no
application at all within this system. Generally speaking, big industry
created everywhere the same relations between the classes of society,
and thus destroyed the peculiar individuality of the various
nationalities. And finally, while the bourgeoisie of each nation still
retained separate national interests, big industry created a class,
which in all nations has the same interest and with which nationality is
already dead; a class which is really rid of all the old world and at
the same time stands pitted against it. Big industry makes for the
worker not only the relation to the capitalist, but labour itself,
unbearable.

It is evident that big industry does not reach the same level of
development in all districts of a country. This does not, however,
retard the class movement of the proletariat, because the proletarians
created by big industry assume leadership of this movement and carry the
whole mass along with them, and because the workers excluded from big
industry are placed by it in a still worse situation than the workers in
big industry itself. The countries in which big industry is developed
act in a similar manner upon the more or less non-industrial countries,
insofar as the latter are swept by universal commerce into the universal
competitive struggle.^[Competition separates individuals from one
another, not only the bourgeois but still more the workers, in spite of
the fact that it brings them together. Hence it is a long time before
these individuals can unite, apart from the fact that for the purposes
of this union -- if it is not to be merely local -- the necessary means,
the great industrial cities and cheap and quick communications, have
first to be produced by big industry. Hence every organised power
standing over against these isolated individuals, who live in
relationships, daily reproducing this isolation, can only be overcome
after long struggles. To demand the opposite would be tantamount to
demanding that competition should not exist in this definite epoch of
history, or that the individuals should banish from their minds
relationships over which in their isolation they have no control.]

These different forms are just so many forms of the organisation of
labour, and hence of property. In each period a unification of the
existing productive forces takes place, insofar as this has been
rendered necessary by needs.

### The Relation of State and Law to Property

The first form of property, in the ancient world as in the Middle Ages,
is tribal property, determined with the Romans chiefly by war, with the
Germans by the rearing of cattle. In the case of the ancient peoples,
since several tribes live together in one town, the tribal property
appears as State property, and the right of the individual to it as mere
"possession" which, however, like tribal property as a whole, is
confined to landed property only. Real private property began with the
ancients, as with modern nations, with movable property. -- (Slavery and
community) (*dominium ex jure Quiritum*^[Ownership in accordance with
the law applying to full Roman citizens. - Ed.]). In the case of the
nations which grew out of the Middle Ages, tribal property evolved
through various stages -- feudal landed property, corporative movable
property, capital invested in manufacture -- to modern capital,
determined by big industry and universal competition, i.e. pure private
property, which has cast off all semblance of a communal institution and
has shut out the State from any influence on the development of
property. To this modern private property corresponds the modern State,
which, purchased gradually by the owners of property by means of
taxation, has fallen entirely into their hands through the national
debt, and its existence has become wholly dependent on the commercial
credit which the owners of property, the bourgeois, extend to it, as
reflected in the rise and fall of State funds on the stock exchange. By
the mere fact that it is a class and no longer an estate, the
bourgeoisie is forced to organise itself no longer locally, but
nationally, and to give a general form to its mean average interest.
Through the emancipation of private property from the community, the
State has become a separate entity, beside and outside civil society;
but it is nothing more than the form of organisation which the bourgeois
necessarily adopt both for internal and external purposes, for the
mutual guarantee of their property and interests. The independence of
the State is only found nowadays in those countries where the estates
have not yet completely developed into classes, where the estates, done
away with in more advanced countries, still have a part to play, and
where there exists a mixture; countries, that is to say, in which no one
section of the population can achieve dominance over the others. This is
the case particularly in Germany. The most perfect example of the modern
State is North America. The modern French, English and American writers
all express the opinion that the State exists only for the sake of
private property, so that this fact has penetrated into the
consciousness of the normal man.

Since the State is the form in which the individuals of a ruling class
assert their common interests, and in which the whole civil society of
an epoch is epitomised, it follows that the State mediates in the
formation of all common institutions and that the institutions receive a
political form. Hence the illusion that law is based on the will, and
indeed on the will divorced from its real basis -- on free will.
Similarly, justice is in its turn reduced to the actual laws.

Civil law develops simultaneously with private property out of the
disintegration of the natural community. With the Romans the development
of private property and civil law had no further industrial and
commercial consequences, because their whole mode of production did not
alter. (Usury!)

With modern peoples, where the feudal community was disintegrated by
industry and trade, there began with the rise of private property and
civil law a new phase, which was capable of further development. The
very first town which carried on an extensive maritime trade in the
Middle Ages, Amalfi, also developed maritime law. As soon as industry
and trade developed private property further, first in Italy and later
in other countries, the highly developed Roman civil law was immediately
adopted again and raised, to authority. When later the bourgeoisie had
acquired so much power that the princes took up its interests in order
to overthrow the feudal nobility by means of the bourgeoisie, there
began in all countries -- in France in the sixteenth century -- the real
development of law, which in all countries except England proceeded on
the basis of the Roman Codex. In England, too, Roman legal principles
had to be introduced to further the development of civil law (especially
in the case of movable property). (It must not be forgotten that law has
just as little an independent history as religion.)

In civil law the existing property relationships are declared to be the
result of the general will. The *jus utendi et abutendi*^[The right of
using and consuming (also: abusing), i.e. of disposing of a thing at
will.] itself asserts on the one hand the fact that private property has
become entirely independent of the community, and on the other the
illusion that private property itself is based solely on the private
will, the arbitrary disposal of the thing. In practice, the abuti has
very definite economic limitations for the owner of private property, if
he does not wish to see his property and hence his jus abutendi pass
into other hands, since actually the thing, considered merely with
reference to his will, is not a thing at all, but only becomes a thing,
true property in intercourse, and independently of the law (a
relationship, which the philosophers call an idea). This juridical
illusion, which reduces law to the mere will, necessarily leads, in the
further development of property relationships, to the position that a
man may have a legal title to a thing without really having the thing.
If, for instance, the income from a piece of land is lost owing to
competition, then the proprietor has certainly his legal title to it
along with the *jus utendi et abutendi*. But he can do nothing with it:
he owns nothing as a landed proprietor if in addition he has not enough
capital to cultivate his ground. This illusion of the jurists also
explains the fact that for them, as for every code, it is altogether
fortuitous that individuals enter into relationships among themselves
(e.g. contracts); it explains why they consider that these relationships
[can] be entered into or not at will, and that their content rests
purely on the individual [free] will of the contracting parties.

Whenever, through the development of industry and commerce, new forms of
intercourse have been evolved (e.g. assurance companies, etc.), the law
has always been compelled to admit them among the modes of acquiring
property.

## FORMS OF SOCIAL CONSCIOUSNESS^[Notes, written by Marx, intended for further elaboration]

The influence of the division of labour on science.

The role of *repression* with regard to the state, law, morality, etc.

It is precisely because the bourgeoisie rules as a class that in the law
it must give itself a general expression.

Natural science and history.

There is no history of politics, law, science, etc., of art, religion,
etc.

To the "community" as it appears in the ancient state, in feudalism and
in the absolute monarchy, to this bond correspond especially the
religious conceptions.

#### *Why the ideologists turn everything upside-down.*

Clerics, jurists, politicians.

Jurists, politicians (statesmen in general), moralists, clerics.

For this ideological subdivision within a class: 1) *The occupation
assumes an independent existence owing to division of labour.* Everyone
believes his craft to be the true one. Illusions regarding the
connection between their craft and reality are the more likely to be
cherished by them because of the very nature of the craft. In
consciousness -- in jurisprudence, politics, etc. -- relations become
concepts; since they do not go beyond these relations, the concepts of
the relations also become fixed concepts in their mind. The judge, for
example, applies the code, he therefore regards legislation as the real,
active driving force. Respect for their goods, because their craft deals
with general matters.

Religion is from the outset *consciousness of the transcendental*
arising from actually existing forces.

This more popularly.

Tradition, with regard to law, religion, etc.

Individuals always proceeded, and always proceed, from themselves. Their
relations are the relations of their real life-process. How does it
happen that their relations assume an independent existence over against
them? and that the forces of their own life become superior to them?

In short: division of labour, the level of which depends on the
development of the productive power at any particular time.

Landed property. Communal property. Feudal. Modern.

Estate property. Manufacturing property. Industrial capital.

# Proletarians and Communism

## Individuals, Class, and Community

In the Middle Ages the citizens in each town were compelled to unite
against the landed nobility to save their skins. The extension of trade,
the establishment of communications, led the separate towns to get to
know other towns, which had asserted the same interests in the struggle
with the same antagonist. Out of the many local corporations of burghers
there arose only gradually the burgher class. The conditions of life of
the individual burghers became, on account of their contradiction to the
existing relationships and of the mode of labour determined by these,
conditions which were common to them all and independent of each
individual. The burghers had created the conditions insofar as they had
torn themselves free from feudal ties, and were created by them insofar
as they were determined by their antagonism to the feudal system which
they found in existence. When the individual towns began to enter into
associations, these common conditions developed into class conditions.
The same conditions, the same contradiction, the same interests
necessarily called forth on the whole similar customs everywhere. The
bourgeoisie itself with its conditions, develops only gradually, splits
according to the division of labour into various fractions and finally
absorbs all propertied classes it finds in existence^[To begin with it
absorbs the branches of labour directly belonging to the State and then
all [more or less] ideological estates.] (while it develops the majority
of the earlier propertyless and a part of the hitherto propertied
classes into a new class, the proletariat) in the measure to which all
property found in existence is transformed into industrial or commercial
capital. The separate individuals form a class only insofar as they have
to carry on a common battle against another class; otherwise they are on
hostile terms with each other as competitors. On the other hand, the
class in its turn achieves an independent existence over against the
individuals, so that the latter find their conditions of existence
predestined, and hence have their position in life and their personal
development assigned to them by their class, become subsumed under it.
This is the same phenomenon as the subjection of the separate
individuals to the division of labour and can only be removed by the
abolition of private property and of labour itself. We have already
indicated several times how this subsuming of individuals under the
class brings with it their subjection to all kinds of ideas, etc.

If from a philosophical point of view one considers this evolution of
individuals in the common conditions of existence of estates and
classes, which followed on one another, and in the accompanying general
conceptions forced upon them, it is certainly very easy to imagine that
in these individuals the species, or "Man", has evolved, or that they
evolved "Man" -- and in this way one can give history some hard clouts
on the ear.^[The Statement which frequently occurs with Saint Max that
each is all that he is through the State is fundamentally the same as
the statement that bourgeois is only a specimen of the bourgeois
species; a statement which presupposes that the class of bourgeois
existed before the individuals constituting it. [*Marginal note by Marx
to this sentence:*] With the philosophers pre-existence of the class.]
One can conceive these various estates and classes to be specific terms
of the general expression, subordinate varieties of the species, or
evolutionary phases of "Man".

This subsuming of individuals under definite classes cannot be abolished
until a class has taken shape, which has no longer any particular class
interest to assert against the ruling class.

The transformation, through the division of labour, of personal powers
(relationships) into material powers, cannot be dispelled by dismissing
the general idea of it from one's mind, but can only be abolished by the
individuals again subjecting these material powers to themselves and
abolishing the division of labour. This is not possible without the
community. Only in community [with others has each] individual the means
of cultivating his gifts in all directions; only in the community,
therefore, is personal freedom possible. In the previous substitutes for
the community, in the State, etc. personal freedom has existed only for
the individuals who developed within the relationships of the ruling
class, and only insofar as they were individuals of this class. The
illusory community, in which individuals have up till now combined,
always took on an independent existence in relation to them, and was at
the same time, since it was the combination of one class over against
another, not only a completely illusory community, but a new fetter as
well. In a real community the individuals obtain their freedom in and
through their association.

Individuals have always built on themselves, but naturally on themselves
within their given historical conditions and relationships, not on the
"pure" individual in the sense of the ideologists. But in the course of
historical evolution, and precisely through the inevitable fact that
within the division of labour social relationships take on an
independent existence, there appears a division within the life of each
individual, insofar as it is personal and insofar as it is determined by
some branch of labour and the conditions pertaining to it. (We do not
mean it to be understood from this that, for example, the rentier, the
capitalist, etc. cease to be persons; but their personality is
conditioned and determined by quite definite class relationships, and
the division appears only in their opposition to another class and, for
themselves, only when they go bankrupt.) In the estate (and even more in
the tribe) this is as yet concealed: for instance, a nobleman always
remains a nobleman, a commoner always a commoner, apart from his other
relationships, a quality inseparable from his individuality. The
division between the personal and the class individual, the accidental
nature of the conditions of life for the individual, appears only with
the emergence of the class, which is itself a product of the
bourgeoisie. This accidental character is only engendered and developed
by competition and the struggle of individuals among themselves. Thus,
in imagination, individuals seem freer under the dominance of the
bourgeoisie than before, because their conditions of life seem
accidental; in reality, of course, they are less free, because they are
more subjected to the violence of things. The difference from the estate
comes out particularly in the antagonism between the bourgeoisie and the
proletariat. When the estate of the urban burghers, the corporations,
etc. emerged in opposition to the landed nobility, their condition of
existence -- movable property and craft labour, which had already
existed latently before their separation from the feudal ties --
appeared as something positive, which was asserted against feudal landed
property, and, therefore, in its own way at first took on a feudal form.
Certainly the refugee serfs treated their previous servitude as
something accidental to their personality. But here they only were doing
what every class that is freeing itself from a fetter does; and they did
not free themselves as a class but separately. Moreover, they did not
rise above the system of estates, but only formed a new estate,
retaining their previous mode of labour even in their new situation, and
developing it further by freeing it from its earlier fetters, which no
longer corresponded to the development already attained.^[N.B. -- It
must not be forgotten that the serf's very need of existing and the
impossibility of a large-scale economy, which involved the distribution
of the allotments among the serfs, very soon reduced the services of the
serfs to their lord to an average of payments in kind and
statute-labour. This made it possible for the serf to accumulate movable
property and hence facilitated his escape out of the possession of his
lord and gave him the prospect of making his way as an urban citizen; it
also created gradations among the serfs, so that the runaway serfs were
already half burghers. It is likewise obvious that the serfs who were
masters of a craft had the best chance of acquiring movable property.]

For the proletarians, on the other hand, the condition of their
existence, labour, and with it all the conditions of existence governing
modern society, have become something accidental, something over which
they, as separate individuals, have no control, and over which no social
organisation can give them control. The contradiction between the
individuality of each separate proletarian and labour, the condition of
life forced upon him, becomes evident to him himself, for he is
sacrificed from youth upwards and, within his own class, has no chance
of arriving at the conditions which would place him in the other class.

Thus, while the refugee serfs only wished to be free to develop and
assert those conditions of existence which were already there, and
hence, in the end, only arrived at free labour, the proletarians, if
they are to assert themselves as individuals, will have to abolish the
very condition of their existence hitherto (which has, moreover, been
that of all society up to the present), namely, labour. Thus they find
themselves directly opposed to the form in which, hitherto, the
individuals, of which society consists, have given themselves collective
expression, that is, the State. In order, therefore, to assert
themselves as individuals, they must overthrow the State.

It follows from all we have been saying up till now that the communal
relationship into which the individuals of a class entered, and which
was determined by their common interests over against a third party, was
always a community to which these individuals belonged only as average
individuals, only insofar as they lived within the conditions of
existence of their class -- a relationship in which they participated
not as individuals but as members of a class. With the community of
revolutionary proletarians, on the other hand, who take their conditions
of existence and those of all members of society under their control, it
is just the reverse; it is as individuals that the individuals
participate in it. It is just this combination of individuals (assuming
the advanced stage of modern productive forces, of course) which puts
the conditions of the free development and movement of individuals under
their control -- conditions which were previously abandoned to chance
and had won an independent existence over against the separate
individuals just because of their separation as individuals, and because
of the necessity of their combination which had been determined by the
division of labour, and through their separation had become a bond alien
to them. Combination up till now (by no means an arbitrary one, such as
is expounded for example in the *Contrat social*, but a necessary one)
was an agreement upon these conditions, within which the individuals
were free to enjoy the freaks of fortune (compare, e.g., the formation
of the North American State and the South American republics). This
right to the undisturbed enjoyment, within certain conditions, of
fortuity and chance has up till now been called personal freedom. These
conditions of existence are, of course, only the productive forces and
forms of intercourse at any particular time.

### Forms of Intercourse

Communism differs from all previous movements in that it overturns the
basis of all earlier relations of production and intercourse, and for
the first time consciously treats all natural premises as the creatures
of hitherto existing men, strips them of their natural character and
subjugates them to the power of the united individuals. Its organisation
is, therefore, essentially economic, the material production of the
conditions of this unity; it turns existing conditions into conditions
of unity. The reality, which communism is creating, is precisely the
true basis for rendering it impossible that anything should exist
independently of individuals, insofar as reality is only a product of
the preceding intercourse of individuals themselves. Thus the communists
in practice treat the conditions created up to now by production and
intercourse as inorganic conditions, without, however, imagining that it
was the plan or the destiny of previous generations to give them
material, and without believing that these conditions were inorganic for
the individuals creating them.

## Contradiction between individuals and their conditions of life as contradiction between productive forces and the form of intercourse

The difference between the individual as a person and what is accidental
to him, is not a conceptual difference but an historical fact. This
distinction has a different significance at different times -- e.g. the
estate as something accidental to the individual in the eighteenth
century, the family more or less too. It is not a distinction that we
have to make for each age, but one which each age makes itself from
among the different elements which it finds in existence, and indeed not
according to any theory, but compelled by material collisions in life.

What appears accidental to the later age as opposed to the earlier --
and this applies also to the elements handed down by an earlier age --
is a form of intercourse which corresponded to a definite stage of
development of the productive forces. The relation of the productive
forces to the form of intercourse is the relation of the form of
intercourse to the occupation or activity of the individuals. (The
fundamental form of this activity is, of course, material, on which
depend all other forms -- mental, political, religious, etc. The various
shaping of material life is, of course, in every case dependent on the
needs which are already developed, and the production, as well as the
satisfaction, of these needs is an historical process, which is not
found in the case of a sheep or a dog (Stirner's refractory principal
argument *adversus hominem*), although sheep and dogs in their present
form certainly, but *malgré eux*, are products of an historical
process.) The conditions under which individuals have intercourse with
each other, so long as the above-mentioned contradiction is absent, are
conditions appertaining to their individuality, in no way external to
them; conditions under which these definite individuals, living under
definite relationships, can alone produce their material life and what
is connected with it, are thus the conditions of their self-activity and
are produced by this self-activity. The definite condition under which
they produce, thus corresponds, as long as the contradiction has not yet
appeared, to the reality of their conditioned nature, their one-sided
existence, the one-sidedness of which only becomes evident when the
contradiction enters on the scene and thus exists for the later
individuals. Then this condition appears as an accidental fetter, and
the consciousness that it is a fetter is imputed to the earlier age as
well.

These various conditions, which appear first as conditions of
self-activity, later as fetters upon it, form in the whole evolution of
history a coherent series of forms of intercourse, the coherence of
which consists in this: in the place of an earlier form of intercourse,
which has become a fetter, a new one is put, corresponding to the more
developed productive forces and, hence, to the advanced mode of the
self-activity of individuals -- a form which in its turn becomes a
fetter and is then replaced by another. Since these conditions
correspond at every stage to the simultaneous development of the
productive forces, their history is at the same time the history of the
evolving productive forces taken over by each new generation, and is,
therefore, the history of the development of the forces of the
individuals themselves.

Since this evolution takes place naturally, i.e. is not subordinated to
a general plan of freely combined individuals, it proceeds from various
localities, tribes, nations, branches of labour, etc. each of which to
start with develops independently of the others and only gradually
enters into relation with the others. Furthermore, it takes place only
very slowly; the various stages and interests are never completely
overcome, but only subordinated to the prevailing interest and trail
along beside the latter for centuries afterwards. It follows from this
that within a nation itself the individuals, even apart from their
pecuniary circumstances, have quite different developments, and that an
earlier interest, the peculiar form of intercourse of which has already
been ousted by that belonging to a later interest, remains for a long
time afterwards in possession of a traditional power in the illusory
community (State, law), which has won an existence independent of the
individuals; a power which in the last resort can only be broken by a
revolution. This explains why, with reference to individual points which
allow of a more general summing-up, consciousness can sometimes appear
further advanced than the contemporary empirical relationships, so that
in the struggles of a later epoch one can refer to earlier theoreticians
as authorities.

On the other hand, in countries which, like North America, begin in an
already advanced historical epoch, the development proceeds very
rapidly. Such countries have no other natural premises than the
individuals, who settled there and were led to do so because the forms
of intercourse of the old countries did not correspond to their wants.
Thus they begin with the most advanced individuals of the old countries,
and, therefore, with the correspondingly most advanced form of
intercourse, before this form of intercourse has been able to establish
itself in the old countries. This is the case with all colonies, insofar
as they are not mere military or trading stations. Carthage, the Greek
colonies, and Iceland in the eleventh and twelfth centuries, provide
examples of this. A similar relationship issues from conquest, when a
form of intercourse which has evolved on another soil is brought over
complete to the conquered country: whereas in its home it was still
encumbered with interests and relationships left over from earlier
periods, here it can and must be established completely and without
hindrance, if only to assure the conquerors' lasting power. (England and
Naples after the Norman conquest, when they received the most perfect
form of feudal organisation.)

### The Contradiction Between the Productive Forces and the Form of Intercourse as the Basis for Social Revolution

This contradiction between the productive forces and the form of
intercourse, which, as we saw, has occurred several times in past
history, without, however, endangering the basis, necessarily on each
occasion burst out in a revolution, taking on at the same time various
subsidiary forms, such as all-embracing collisions, collisions of
various classes, contradiction of consciousness, battle of ideas, etc.,
political conflict, etc. From a narrow point of view one may isolate one
of these subsidiary forms and consider it as the basis of these
revolutions; and this is all the more easy as the individuals who
started the revolutions had illusions about their own activity according
to their degree of culture and the stage of historical development.

Thus all collisions in history have their origin, according to our view,
in the contradiction between the productive forces and the form of
intercourse. Incidentally, to lead to collisions in a country, this
contradiction need not necessarily have reached its extreme limit in
this particular country. The competition with industrially more advanced
countries, brought about by the expansion of international intercourse,
is sufficient to produce a similar contradiction in countries with a
backward industry (e.g. the latent proletariat in Germany brought into
view by view by the competition of English industry).

### Conquest

This whole interpretation of history appears to be contradicted by the
fact of conquest. Up till now violence, war, pillage, murder and
robbery, etc. have been accepted as the driving force of history. Here
we must limit ourselves to the chief points and take, therefore, only
the most striking example -- the destruction of an old civilisation by a
barbarous people and the resulting formation of an entirely new
organisation of society. (Rome and the barbarians; feudalism and Gaul;
the Byzantine Empire and the Turks.)

With the conquering barbarian people war itself is still, as indicated
above, a regular form of intercourse, which is the more eagerly
exploited as the increase in population together with the traditional
and, for it, the only possible, crude mode of production gives rise to
the need for new means of production. In Italy, on the other hand, the
concentration of landed property (caused not only by buying-up and
indebtedness but also by inheritance, since loose living being rife and
marriage rare, the old families gradually died out and their possessions
fell into the hands of a few) and its conversion into grazing land
(caused not only by the usual economic forces still operative today but
by the importation of plundered and tribute-corn and the resultant lack
of demand for Italian corn) brought about the almost total disappearance
of the free population. The very slaves died out again and again, and
had constantly to be replaced by new ones. Slavery remained the basis of
the whole productive system. The plebeians, midway between freemen and
slaves, never succeeded in becoming more than a proletarian rabble. Rome
indeed never became more than a city; its connection with the provinces
was almost exclusively political and could, therefore, easily be broken
again by political events.

Nothing is more common than the notion that in history up till now it
has only been a question of taking. The barbarians take the Roman
Empire, and this fact of taking is made to explain the transition from
the old world to the feudal system. In this taking by barbarians,
however, the question is, whether the nation which is conquered has
evolved industrial productive forces, as is the case with modern
peoples, or whether their productive forces are based for the most part
merely on their association and on the community. Taking is further
determined by the object taken. A banker's fortune, consisting of paper,
cannot be taken at all, without the taker's submitting to the conditions
of production and intercourse of the country taken. Similarly the total
industrial capital of a modern industrial country. And finally,
everywhere there is very soon an end to taking, and when there is
nothing more to take, you have to set about producing. From this
necessity of producing, which very soon asserts itself, it follows that
the form of community adopted by the settling conquerors must correspond
to the stage of development of the productive forces they find in
existence; or, if this is not the case from the start, it must change
according to the productive forces. By this, too, is explained the fact,
which people profess to have noticed everywhere in the period following
the migration of the peoples, namely, that the servant was master, and
that the conquerors very soon took over language, culture and manners
from the conquered. The feudal system was by no means brought complete
from Germany, but had its origin, as far as the conquerors were
concerned, in the martial organisation of the army during the actual
conquest, and this only evolved after the conquest into the feudal
system proper through the action of the productive forces found in the
conquered countries. To what an extent this form was determined by the
productive forces is shown by the abortive attempts to realise other
forms derived from reminiscences of ancient Rome (Charlemagne, etc.).

## Contradictions of Big Industry: Revolution

Our investigation hitherto started from the instruments of production,
and it has already shown that private property was a necessity for
certain industrial stages. In *industrie extractive* private property
still coincides with labour; in small industry and all agriculture up
till now property is the necessary consequence of the existing
instruments of production; in big industry the contradiction between the
instrument of production and private property appears from the first
time and is the product of big industry; moreover, big industry must be
highly developed to produce this contradiction. And thus only with big
industry does the abolition of private property become possible.

## Contradiction Between the Productive Forces and the Form of Intercourse

In big industry and competition the whole mass of conditions of
existence, limitations, biases of individuals, are fused together into
the two simplest forms: private property and labour. With money every
form of intercourse, and intercourse itself, is considered fortuitous
for the individuals. Thus money implies that all previous intercourse
was only intercourse of individuals under particular conditions, not of
individuals as individuals. These conditions are reduced to two:
accumulated labour or private property, and actual labour. If both or
one of these ceases, then intercourse comes to a standstill. The modern
economists themselves, e.g. Sismondi, Cherbuliez, etc., oppose
"association of individuals" to "association of capital." On the other
hand, the individuals themselves are entirely subordinated to the
division of labour and hence are brought into the most complete
dependence on one another. Private property, insofar as within labour
itself it is opposed to labour, evolves out of the necessity of
accumulation, and has still, to begin with, rather the form of the
communality; but in its further development it approaches more and more
the modern form of private property. The division of labour implies from
the outset the division of the conditions of labour, of tools and
materials, and thus the splitting-up of accumulated capital among
different owners, and thus, also, the division between capital and
labour, and the different forms of property itself. The more the
division of labour develops and accumulation grows, the sharper are the
forms that this process of differentiation assumes. Labour itself can
only exist on the premise of this fragmentation.

Thus two facts are here revealed. First the productive forces appear as
a world for themselves, quite independent of and divorced from the
individuals, alongside the individuals: the reason for this is that the
individuals, whose forces they are, exist split up and in opposition to
one another, whilst, on the other hand, these forces are only real
forces in the intercourse and association of these individuals. Thus, on
the one hand, we have a totality of productive forces, which have, as it
were, taken on a material form and are for the individuals no longer the
forces of the individuals but of private property, and hence of the
individuals only insofar as they are owners of private property
themselves. Never, in any earlier period, have the productive forces
taken on a form so indifferent to the intercourse of individuals as
individuals, because their intercourse itself was formerly a restricted
one. On the other hand, standing over against these productive forces,
we have the majority of the individuals from whom these forces have been
wrested away, and who, robbed thus of all real life-content, have become
abstract individuals, but who are, however, only by this fact put into a
position to enter into relation with one another *as individuals*.

The only connection which still links them with the productive forces
and with their own existence -- labour -- has lost all semblance of
self-activity and only sustains their life by stunting it. While in the
earlier periods self-activity and the production of material life were
separated, in that they devolved on different persons, and while, on
account of the narrowness of the individuals themselves, the production
of material life was considered as a subordinate mode of self-activity,
they now diverge to such an extent that altogether material life appears
as the end, and what produces this material life, labour (which is now
the only possible but, as we see, negative form of self-activity), as
the means.

### The Necessity, Preconditions and Consequences of the Abolition of Private Property

Thus things have now come to such a pass that the individuals must
appropriate the existing totality of productive forces, not only to
achieve self-activity, but, also, merely to safeguard their very
existence. This appropriation is first determined by the object to be
appropriated, the productive forces, which have been developed to a
totality and which only exist within a universal intercourse. From this
aspect alone, therefore, this appropriation must have a universal
character corresponding to the productive forces and the intercourse.

The appropriation of these forces is itself nothing more than the
development of the individual capacities corresponding to the material
instruments of production. The appropriation of a totality of
instruments of production is, for this very reason, the development of a
totality of capacities in the individuals themselves.

This appropriation is further determined by the persons appropriating.
Only the proletarians of the present day, who are completely shut off
from all self-activity, are in a position to achieve a complete and no
longer restricted self-activity, which consists in the appropriation of
a totality of productive forces and in the thus postulated development
of a totality of capacities. All earlier revolutionary appropriations
were restricted; individuals, whose self-activity was restricted by a
crude instrument of production and a limited intercourse, appropriated
this crude instrument of production, and hence merely achieved a new
state of limitation. Their instrument of production became their
property, but they themselves remained subordinate to the division of
labour and their own instrument of production. In all expropriations up
to now, a mass of individuals remained subservient to a single
instrument of production; in the appropriation by the proletarians, a
mass of instruments of production must be made subject to each
individual, and property to all. Modern universal intercourse can be
controlled by individuals, therefore, only when controlled by all.

This appropriation is further determined by the manner in which it must
be effected. It can only be effected through a union, which by the
character of the proletariat itself can again only be a universal one,
and through a revolution, in which, on the one hand, the power of the
earlier mode of production and intercourse and social organisation is
overthrown, and, on the other hand, there develops the universal
character and the energy of the proletariat, without which the
revolution cannot be accomplished; and in which, further, the
proletariat rids itself of everything that still clings to it from its
previous position in society.

Only at this stage does self-activity coincide with material life, which
corresponds to the development of individuals into complete individuals
and the casting-off of all natural limitations. The transformation of
labour into self-activity corresponds to the transformation of the
earlier limited intercourse into the intercourse of individuals as such.
With the appropriation of the total productive forces through united
individuals, private property comes to an end. Whilst previously in
history a particular condition always appeared as accidental, now the
isolation of individuals and the particular private gain of each man
have themselves become accidental.

The individuals, who are no longer subject to the division of labour,
have been conceived by the philosophers as an ideal, under the name
"Man". They have conceived the whole process which we have outlined as
the evolutionary process of "Man," so that at every historical stage
"Man" was substituted for the individuals and shown as the motive force
of history. The whole process was thus conceived as a process of the
self-estrangement of "Man," and this was essentially due to the fact
that the average individual of the later stage was always foisted on to
the earlier stage, and the consciousness of a later age on to the
individuals of an earlier. Through this inversion, which from the first
is an abstract image of the actual conditions, it was possible to
transform the whole of history into an evolutionary process of
consciousness.

## The Necessity of the Communist Revolution

Finally, from the conception of history we have sketched we obtain these
further conclusions:

1. In the development of productive forces there comes a stage when
   productive forces and means of intercourse are brought into being,
   which, under the existing relationships, only cause mischief, and are
   no longer productive but destructive forces (machinery and money);
   and connected with this a class is called forth, which has to bear
   all the burdens of society without enjoying its advantages, which,
   ousted from society, is forced into the most decided antagonism to
   all other classes; a class which forms the majority of all members of
   society, and from which emanates the consciousness of the necessity
   of a fundamental revolution, the communist consciousness, which may,
   of course, arise among the other classes too through the
   contemplation of the situation of this class.
2. The conditions under which definite productive forces can be applied
   are the conditions of the rule of a definite class of society, whose
   social power, deriving from its property, has its
   practical-idealistic expression in each case in the form of the
   State; and, therefore, every revolutionary struggle is directed
   against a class, which till then has been in power.^[[*Marginal note
   by Marx:*] The people are interested in maintaining the present state
   of production.]
3. In all revolutions up till now the mode of activity always remained
   unscathed and it was only a question of a different distribution of
   this activity, a new distribution of labour to other persons, whilst
   the communist revolution is directed against the preceding mode of
   activity, does away with labour, and abolishes the rule of all
   classes with the classes themselves, because it is carried through by
   the class which no longer counts as a class in society, is not
   recognised as a class, and is in itself the expression of the
   dissolution of all classes, nationalities, etc. within present
   society; and
4. Both for the production on a mass scale of this communist
   consciousness, and for the success of the cause itself, the
   alteration of men on a mass scale is, necessary, an alteration which
   can only take place in a practical movement, a revolution; this
   revolution is necessary, therefore, not only because the ruling class
   cannot be overthrown in any other way, but also because the class
   overthrowing it can only in a revolution succeed in ridding itself of
   all the muck of ages and become fitted to found society anew.
