---
title: The Impotence of the Revolutionary Group
author: Sam Moss
date: 1939
description: Published in *Living Marxism* No. 7. This text is taken from <https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/sam-moss-the-impotence-of-the-revolutionary-group>.
...

# I.

The difference between the radical organizations and the broad masses
appears as a difference of objectives. The former apparently seek to
overthrow capitalism; the masses seek only to maintain their living
standards within capitalism. The revolutionary groups agitate for the
abolition of private property; the people, called the masses, either own
bits of private property, or hope some day to own them. The
communist-minded struggle for the eradication of the profit system; the
masses, capitalist minded, speak of the bosses' right to a "fair
profit." As long as a relatively large majority of the American working
class maintain the living conditions to which they are accustomed, and
have the leisure to follow their pursuits, such as baseball and movies,
they are generally well content, and they are grateful to the system
that makes these things possible. The radical, who opposes this system
and thereby jeopardizes their position within it, is far more dangerous
to them than the bosses who pay them, and they do not hesitate to make a
martyr of him. As long as the system satisfies their basic needs in the
accustomed manner, they are well satisfied with it and whatever evils
they behold in society, they attribute to "unfair bosses," "bad
administrators" or other individuals.

The small radical groups --- "intellectuals" who have "raised themselves
to the level of comprehending historical movements as a whole," and who
trace the social ills to the system rather than to individuals --- see
beyond the objectives of the workers, and realize that the basic needs
of the working class can not be satisfied for more than a temporary
period under capitalism, and that every concession that Capital grants
Labour serves only to postpone the death struggle between these
adversaries. They therefore --- at least in theory --- strive
continually to turn the struggle for immediate demands into a struggle
against the system. But beside the realities of bread and butter which
capitalism can still offer a majority of the workers, the radicals can
submit only hopes and ideas, and the workers abandon their struggles the
moment their demands are met.

The reason for the apparent difference of objectives between the
revolutionary groups and the working class is easy to understand. The
working class, concerned only with the needs of the moment and in
general content with its social status, reflects the level of capitalist
culture --- a culture that is "for the enormous majority a mere training
to act as a machine." The revolutionists, however, are so to speak
deviations from the working class; they are the by-products of
capitalism; they represent isolated cases of workers who, because of
unique circumstances in their individual lives, have diverged from the
usual course of development in that, though born of wage slaves, they
have acquired an intellectual interest, that has availed itself of the
existing educational possibilities. Though of these, many have succeeded
in rising into the petty-bourgeoisie, others, whose careers in this
direction were blocked by circumstances have remained within the working
class as intellectual workers. Dissatisfied with their social status as
appendages to machines, they, unable to rise within the system, rise
against it. Quite frequently cut off from association with their fellow
workers on the job, who do not share their radical views, they unite
with other rebellious intellectual workers and with other unsuccessful
careerists of other strata of society, into organizations of changing
society. If, in their struggle to liberate the masses from wage slavery,
they seem to be acting from the noblest of motives, certainly it doesn't
take much to see that when one suffers for another he has only
identified that other's sorrow with his own. But whenever they have the
chance to rise within the existing society they, with rare exceptions,
do not hesitate to abandon their revolutionary objectives. And when they
do so, they offer sincere and sound logic for their apostasy, for, "Does
it require deep intuition to comprehend that man's ideas change with
every change in his material existence?" Sports in the development of
capitalism, the revolutionary organizations, small ineffectual, buzzing
along the flanks of the broad masses, have done nothing to affect the
course of history either for good or ill. Their occasional periods of
activity can be explained only by their temporary or permanent forsaking
of their revolutionary aims in order to unite with the workers immediate
demands and then it was not their own revolutionary role that they
played, but the conservative role of the working class. When the workers
achieved their objectives, the radical groups lapsed again into
impotence. Their role was always a supplementary, and never a deciding
one.

# II.

It is the writer's conviction that the day of the revolutionary party is
over; the revolutionary groups under present conditions are tolerated,
or rather ignored, only as long as they are impotent; that nothing is so
symptomatic of their powerlessness as the fact that they are permitted
to exist. We have often stated that the working class which will endure
while capitalism lasts, and which cannot be obliterated under this
system can alone wage a successful struggle against capitalism and that
the initiative can not be taken out of its hands. We may add here after
all the conservatism of the working class today, only reflects the still
massive strength of capitalism, and that this material power cannot be
cast out of existence by propaganda but by a material power greater than
that of capital. Yet from time to time members of our own group take to
task the group's inactivity. They declare that, isolated as we are from
the class struggle as it is waged today, we are essentially mere study
groups that will be completely out of touch with events when social
upheavals do occur. They state that since the class struggle is
omnipresent in capitalism it behoves us as a revolutionary organization
to deepen the class war. But they do not suggest any specific course of
action. The fact that all other radical organizations in the field,
through striving to overcome their isolation are nonetheless
insignificant Marxist sects like ourselves, does not convince our
critics of the futility of any action that small groups can take.

The very general statement that the class war is ever-present and that
we should deepen it, is made first of all in the assumption that the
class struggle is a revolutionary struggle, but the fact is that the
workers as a mass are conservative. It is assumed that the class war
aims directly at the weakening of capitalism, but the fact is that,
though it serves this ultimate purpose, it is directly aimed at the
position of the workers within the society. Furthermore, the actual
class struggle is not waged through revolutionary organizations. It is
waged in the factories and through the unions.

In America today it is being waged by such organizations as the A.F. Of
L. and the C.I.O., and though here and there across the continent arise
sporadic strikes that are outlawed by all the existing conservative
organizations and that indicate the form the class war may take when all
these organizations are completely emasculated by the State, these
workers' movements are infrequent and isolated today. True, the
leadership of both the C.I.O. and the A.F. of L. is conservative, but
then so is the membership of both unions. In order to retain their
membership and attract more workers to it, the unions must wrest
concessions from the capitalist class for them; the workers remain in
the unions only because they obtain such concessions through them; and
to the extent that they do obtain such concessions for the workers, the
unions are waging the class struggle. If, therefore, we are to plunge
into the class struggle, we must go where the struggle is being waged.
We must concentrate on either factories or the unions or both. If we do
so, we must abandon, at least overly, our revolutionary principles, for
if we give them expression, we shall swiftly be discharged from the job
and expelled from the union, and, in a word, cut off from the class
struggle and returned precipitantly to our former impotent state. To
become active in the class struggle means, then to become as
conservative as the large body of workers. In other words, as soon as we
enter the class struggle we can contribute nothing special to it. The
only alternative to this course is to continue as we are, clinging
impotently to our principles. Regardless of which course we pursue, it
is obvious that we cannot affect the course of events. Our impotence
illustrates what should be obvious to all: that history is made by the
broad masses alone.

The Groups of Council Communists distinguish themselves from all the
other revolutionary groups in that they do not consider themselves
vanguards of the workers, nor leaders of the workers, but as being one
with the workers' movement. But this difference between our organization
and others is only an ideological difference, and reflects no
corresponding material difference. In practice we are actually like all
the other groups. Like them, we function outside the spheres of
production, where the class struggle is fought; like them, we are
isolated from the large mass of workers. We differ only in ideology from
all the other groups, but then it is only in ideology on which all the
other groups differ. Practically there is no difference between all
groups. And if we were to follow the suggestion of our critics and
"deepen the class struggle," our "Leninistic" character would become
quite evident. Let us for assume, for example, that it is possible for
us as an independent group to organize the workers of some industrial
area. The fact that they have not moved of their own accord without our
aid means that they are dependent upon us for their initiative. By
supplying the initiative, we are taking it out of their hands. If they
discover that we are capable of giving them the initial impulse, they
will depend on us for the subsequent impulses, and we shall soon find
ourselves leading them step by step. Thus, they who advocate that we
"intensify" the class war are not merely ignoring the objective
conditions that make such an act questionable, but are advocating also
our leadership over the masses. Of course, they may argue that,
realizing the evils of such a course, we can guard against them. But
this argument is again on an ideological level. Practically, we shall be
compelled to adjust ourselves to circumstances. Thus it becomes obvious
that by such a practice we would function like a Leninist group, and
could at best produce only the results of Leninism. However, the
impotence of the existing Leninist groups shows the improbability of the
success of even such a course, and points once more to the obsolescence
of small revolutionary groups in regards to real proletarian needs, a
condition perhaps forecasting the approaching day when it shall be
objectively impossible for any small group to assume leadership of the
masses only to be forced in the end to exploit them to its own needs.
The working class alone can wage the revolutionary struggle even as it
is today waging alone the non-revolutionary struggle, and the reason
that the rebellious class conscious workers band into groups outside the
spheres of the real class struggle is only that there is as yet no
revolutionary movement within them. Their existence as groups,
therefore, reflects, not a situation for revolution, but rather a
non-revolutionary situation. When the revolution does come, their
numbers will he submerged within it, not as functioning organizations,
but as individual workers.

But though no practical differences between us and other revolutionary
organizations is permitted by the objective conditions, we can at least
maintain our ideological difference. Therefore, where all groups see
revolution in the most impossible situations and believe that all that
is lacking for revolution is a group with the "correct Marxist line";
where, in a word, they exaggerate the importance of ideas, and
incidently of themselves as carriers of those ideas --- an attitude that
reflects their careerist proclivities --- we wish to see the truth of
each situation. We see that the class struggle is today still
conservative; that society is characterized not simply by this single
struggle but by a multiplicity of struggles, which varies with the
multiplicity of strata within the system, and which so far has affected
the struggle between Capital and Labour in the interest of the former.

But because we see not merely the immediate situation but also the
trends therein, we realize that the difficulties of capitalism are
progressively increasing and that the means of satisfying even the
immediate wants of the working class are continuously diminishing. We
recognize that as a concomitant of the increasing non-profitability of
capitalism, is the progressive levelling out of the divisions within the
two classes, as capitalists expropriate capitalists in the upper class,
and, in the lower class, as the means of subsistence, the better to
extend them, is apportioned more and more uniformly among the masses,
for the sake of averting the social catastrophe attendant upon the
inability to satisfy them. As these developments are taking place, the
divided objectives of the upper class are converging toward one
objective; the preservation of the capitalist exploitative system; and
the divided objectives of the workers are, despite the increasing
ideological confusion, converging toward one objective: a fundamental
change of present socio-economic forms of life. Then will we, only
another strata of the working class now, or more correctly an offshoot,
really merge with the entire working class as our objectives merge with
theirs and we shall lose ourselves in the revolutionary struggle.

But this question may be raised, why, then, realizing the futility of
the act, do you band together into groups? The answer is simply that the
act serves a personal need. It is inevitable that men sharing a common
feeling of rebellion against a society that lives by exploitation and
war should seek out their own kind in society, and in whatever weapons
fall to their command. Unable to rebel against the system with the rest
of the population, they will oppose it alone. The fact that they engage
in such action however futile it may appear establishes the basis for
the prediction that when the large masses, reacting to the compulsives
of the objectively revolutionary situation, feel similarly affected,
they too will band together out of the same urgency and they too will
use whatever weapons fall to their disposal. When they do so, they will
not rise from ideological factors, but from necessity, and their
ideologies will only reflect the necessities then, as do their current
bourgeois ideologies reflect the necessity today.

The view of the revolutionary ineffectiveness of small groups is
accounted a pessimistic one by revolutionary organizations. What if this
view does indicate the inevitability of revolution? What if it does
point to the objective end of a pre-established leadership of the
masses, and to the end of all exploitation? The radical groups are not
happy with this picture. They derive no pleasure from the prospect of a
future where they have no more significance than their fellow human
beings, and they condemn a view of such a future as a philosophy of
defeatism. But, actually we have spoken only of the futility of small
radical groups; we have been quite optimistic as to the future of the
workers. But to all radical organizations, if their groups are defeated,
and if their groups are dying, then all is dying. In such pronouncements
therefore they reveal the true motivation for their rebellion and the
true character of their organizations. We, however, should find no cause
for despair in the impotence of these groups. Rather we should behold in
it reason for optimism regarding the future of the workers. For in this
very atrophy of all groups that would lead the masses out of capitalism
into another society we are seeing for the first time in history the
objective end to all political leadership and to the division of society
into economic and political categories.
