---
title: LIP and the Self-Managed Counter-Revolution
author: Négation
date: 1973
description: "A critical assessment of workers' self-management at the LIP factory in France. This Negation is not related to the US group with the same name. French original at <https://archivesautonomies.org/IMG/pdf/gauchecommuniste/gauchescommunistes-ap1952/negation/negation-n03.pdf>. From <https://www.oocities.org/~johngray/lip.htm>."
...

## Publication notes

This is a translation of "Lip et la contre-révolution autogestionnaire"
first published in the French journal _Négation_ in 1973, and also
apparently as a separate pamphlet. The translation was made by Peter
Rachleff and Alan Wallach and was published as a pamphlet by Black & Red
in Detroit in 1975.

Négation was a successor to a council communist group called Archinoir,
formed in Grenoble in 1968, which produced three issues of a journal of
the same name in 1969/70. Archinoir had collaborated with the group
Informations et Correspondances Ouvrières. Négation left the ICO in
September 1972. It produced three issues of its journal before
disappearing.

## Négation introduction

An impressive number of pamphlets and texts have appeared dealing with
the Lip conflict. This theoretical activity has generally followed some
practical or agitational activity by the authors regarding this conflict
unique since 1968.

The writers of this pamphlet have not taken part in this activity. As
soon as the struggle of the Lip workers assumed its form, attractive for
others, it appeared clear to us that this struggle -- in its content --
was not ours; thus the critique that we were then making remained
concerned with its immediate aspects and we did not feel compelled to
publish it.

With the evolution of the conflict, certain among us considered a brief
publication which would concentrate on the intrinsic limits of this
workers' struggle and would contrast it with forms of resistance
presently dominant among workers (absenteeism, sabotage, etc.).

Because the collaboration that these comrades began with others in order
to do this turned out to be impossible, we met again in order to
transform their original text in a manner which brought us to a
progressive reflection. In effect, it became more and more evident to us
that "Lip" represented not only a struggle in which we recognized none
of our aspirations for a human society, but rather that this struggle
was simultaneously a particular expression of the contemporary
capitalist movement and a sort of anticipation of the formation of our
enemy: the capitalist counter-revolution. It is therefore not surprising
that this text is dense, for it was necessary to introduce the critique
of the Lip conflict with a long analysis of the workers' movement and
the capitalist movement, although necessarily abridged. Nor is it
surprising that it went beyond a simple critique in embarking on an
analysis of the self-managed counter-revolution.

This latter point will later on be stated precisely and developed
through various texts and perhaps by a publication bearing specifically
on the revolutionary and counterrevolutionary movements which are now
taking place.

## Translators' afterword \[1975\]

We undertook the translation of this text because we found it to be one
of the most stimulating analyses of any subject we had encountered in
too long a time. Although we did not agree fully with all aspects of the
analysis, we felt that we had gained immensely from our grappling with
it. It is in the hope that you will also benefit from a confrontation
with this pamphlet that we have translated it. We encourage you to
discuss your reactions to it among yourselves, and to communicate them
both to us (c/o Black & Red) and to the original authors (Nicolas Will,
151 rue de Belleville, 75019 Paris, France). We would like to express
our special thanks to Ron Rothbart and Fredy Perlman. We hope this text
will further an on-going dialogue among all of us who seek to better
understand the world in which we live so that we might better share in
the project of totally transforming it.

For further information, and alternative points of view on the Lip
struggle, we can suggest the following (by no means exhaustive)
bibliography:

* "Lip: une brèche dans le mouvement ouvrier traditionnel," _Mise au
point_, No. 2.

* "Lip revu et corrigé," _La lanterne noire_.

* "Lip: The Organization of Defeat," _Internationalism_, No. 5.

* "Lip: c'est bien fini," _Lutte de classe_, March 1974.

Peter Rachleff, Alan Wallach

## Chapter 1: The workers' movement and its decline

### 1.1. The expropriation of the expropriators

The workers' movement appeared with the first developments of capital.
It was the movement of proletarians in struggle against the formal
domination of capital over labor, the first historical mode of
domination of capital.

What characterizes the functioning of this mode is the extraction of
absolute surplus-value. The labor process consists principally of human
labor. Moreover, the content of this labor remains artisanal and
skilled. In this first period, capital is content with bringing about
the separation between the means of production and the producer, the
necessary condition for the appearance of the exchange of labor-power
for wages, and with broadening the labor process to the level of
manufacture.

The proletarian is thus simultaneously a "proletarian" (one who is
constrained to exchange his labor-power for wages because he is without
social reserves) and a "worker" (one who "works" or whose use-value is
qualitatively important to the productive process).

Out of this comes the initial content of the workers' movement: on the
one hand, struggles for the reduction of labor time, because the
extraction of absolute surplus-value implies the lengthening of the
working-day, and the creation of organs to defend the price of
labor-power (craft and then industrial unions).

On the other hand, the preservation of the pre-capitalist content of the
labor process determines within the proletarian a **producer's
consciousness**, which is reinforced by the fact that, confronting him,
the capitalist appears as a lazy parasite. Working "as an artisan," but
for the accumulation of capital and under the direction of a capitalist,
the struggle of the proletarian-producer also seeks the re-appropriation
of the means of production, "**the expropriation of the
expropriators**."

But, if the producers' attack on the ownership of the means of
production was at the heart of the workers' movement of the 19th
century, and if the question of socialism had thus seemed to sum itself
up in that of **property ownership**, it was also because this
ownership, under the guise of **personal** ownership, seemed **both
arbitrary and injurious** to the workers.

Given the continuation of the pre-capitalist labor process, the
capitalist's accession to property ownership changes nothing about
production itself, but only its scale. It appears that the capitalist
does nothing for production, but is content to live off it, while the
workers do everything.

He thus appears all the more as simply the bearer of a title of
ownership. The function which he has nevertheless acquired, the
organization of the sale of products and the purchase of raw materials
and labor-power, remains relatively simple, so that its being taken over
by the association of the workers seems to pose no problem --
technically or economically.

In this period of general prosperity of capital and relative
independence of capitals from each other, the function of the
**management of capital** -- control over its insertion into the
circulation process (both up and downstream from production itself), and
the equally necessary control over its reproduction -- appears less as a
separate function worthy of compensation than as a privilege connected
to the **ownership** of capital and the product. Even at the time of the
Amiens Charter (1906) which states that "the union, today an
organization of resistance, tomorrow will be the organization of
production and distribution, the basis of social reorganization," the
question of the management of capital had not been posed as such.

Personal ownership of the means of production is arbitrary and also
injurious to the producers. In effect, the weak unification of the
capitalist process on the level of society allows the owner a large
margin of social irresponsibility. The firm that he possesses is still
small and is situated in a limited market. If he judges it necessary or
useful for him, he may close it without provoking much of a fuss. The
other capitalists (creditors aside) will view his disappearance
favorably or indifferently, depending on the relative division of the
markets. The workers, equally isolated for the same reason, cannot
endanger other sectors by their response. Moreover, the continued
existence of other modes of production within society -- and this is an
important characteristic of the merely formal domination of Capital --
allows at least part of the discharged workers to survive in some other
manner, often by returning to craft production or agriculture. The
others swell the reserve army which grows in the cities.

These three characteristics (the consciousness of being a producer among
the workers, due to the maintenance of the former labor process; the
apparent arbitrariness of property ownership with the question of
management not posing itself; finally, the social irresponsibility
connected to personal property ownership) explain why the practical form
assumed by the 19th century workers' movement was that of **production
cooperatives**. Beyond defensive unions, and after the abandonment of
the utopia of a return to small-scale individual property, one idea
remains. It is the idea -- later to be taken up by unions
(anarcho-syndicalism) -- that the workers can simultaneously be
associated and the owners of their common means of production. Like the
non-producing owner, they will **thereby** fulfill the role of manager,
or according to the consciousness of the epoch, they will sell and
divide among themselves the **"whole product" of their labor** (the
slogan from Proudhon to the Gotha Social Democratic Program).

Moreover, unlike the capitalist owner, the collective producer-owner
(facing a variable capital which is only itself) is also **thereby**
socially responsible for the continuation and smooth functioning of the
firm. "... \[t\]he antithesis between capital and labour is overcome
within \[the cooperative factories\], if at first only by way of making
the associated labourers into their own capitalist, i.e., by enabling
them to use the means of production for the employment of their own
labour."[^01]

### 1.2. Dead labor

Capitalist expansion and concentration at the end of the 19th century,
the war of 1914-1918 and the revolutionary period which followed, marked
an important turning point in the history of the workers' movement. This
period is, in effect, the beginning of the painful passage to the real
domination of capital over labor, which was completed only after two
world wars and the great depression of the 30s.

In this second historical phase of Capital, the production process
becomes specifically capitalist. It is based on the extraction of
relative surplus-value, by the constant increase of productivity due to
the perfection of techniques, the development of the productive forces
and their increasing socialization. The extraction of surplus-value
depends above all on these processes, which lower the price of
commodities in order to increase the surplus-value that they contain by
decreasing the necessary labor-time. The share of human labor in the
production process now diminishes in comparison to dead labor; the
"worker" disappears and only the "proletarian" remains. The use-value of
the commodity labor-power loses its particular determinations and comes
to depend entirely on the more or less large quantity of surplus-labor
that it can be made to produce. This is the epoch of the "scientific
organization of labor" and of the appearance of the "ouvrier spécialisé"
("specialized worker"). The term "specialized worker" is simply a
euphemism to signify that the "work" of this worker has been stripped of
all quality. His labor requires no training, no apprenticeship.
Labor-power then becomes absolutely **interchangeable**, logically
enough, since the only thing that counts is the ability to expend
labor-time. All the skill is now in the machine, and the "specialized
worker" is a good or a bad worker depending on whether or not he reports
to his post on time.

The increasingly abstract relationship of the worker to the labor
process makes the **whole "producer-consciousness" disappear**. This is
clearly manifested in the current outbreak of absenteeism, sabotage and
high turnover. Certainly, these forms of struggle are not new, nor have
they replaced so-called "traditional" struggles over wages. But, like
many other phenomena, they visibly acquire their full meaning in our
epoch by reflecting both the **secondary** role of the human being in
the actual labor process as well as his crucial position for capital. In
effect, the increase of the organic composition of capital indicates not
only the de-qualification of labor and the inter-changeability of
workers, but also the pressure that this brings to bear on profits. This
imposes a speed-up which reduces man to the level of a supplementary but
**decisive** machine for the capitalist mode of production. From the
worker's point of view, these forms of struggle are thus **human**
reactions, elementary in the face of a mode of production which can
survive only by continually denying those by whom it lives. The key
difference from the epoch in which Pouget advocated sabotage as a means
of pressuring the boss without losing wages by striking is that these
reactions can no longer be neutralized by a simple wage increase. It has
even become necessary to invent "job enrichment" to try to conjure away
the irreversible fact that, today, the proletariat is no longer the
class of labor.

If only for this reason, the struggle of the proletariat can no longer
be the struggle of the workers' movement either in its aims or in its
means. It is no longer a matter of the associated proletarians becoming
their own capitalist but of destroying the capitalist form itself, the
firm, along with wage-labor and the market.

### 1.3. Variable capital and the unions

#### 1.3.A. The CGT and devalorization

The period when Capital achieves real domination over labor and over the
totality of social relations is also the period when the profoundly
contradictory nature of capital becomes clear.

The increase in the organic composition of capital, which makes possible
an immediate increase in a firm's profits, rapidly leads to a decrease
in the rate of profit on a social scale: the growth of the **mass** of
profit brought about by the growth of invested capital is connected to
the relative increase of constant capital, since it is by means of its
superior productivity that a capital manages to absorb its competitors.
In brief, today the process of valorization[^02] can only be carried out
through the process of devalorization; the capitalist who has nothing
but exchange-value at heart ceaselessly endeavors to decrease it.

This contradiction contains another: the law of value, the relations of
production, are increasingly opposed to the development of the
productive forces, setting in motion ever more total crises, such as the
one we are entering today.

As a consequence of the increasing devalorization, the traditional
system of private ownership of the means of production is called into
question, as is seen most clearly in nationalizations. Fundamentally,
nationalization consists of entrusting a capital to the State. Since the
State is satisfied with less profit, the share of other capitals in the
division of total surplus-value is increased, and thus everything goes
on "as if" the nationalized capital were **worth less**, since it earns
less surplus-value.

But nationalizations are only an extreme case of the socialization of
capital which is involved in devalorization. In general, a firm's
capital loses its independence when, in order to compensate for the
lowering of the **rate** of profit by increasing its **mass**, it
becomes necessary to increase the size of an individual capital to the
point that immobile property, financial capital, and the firm's capital
pass into different hands. The creation of corporations by means of
selling stocks is the first act of this process. To the capital
accumulated by the firm itself is added a capital of external origin,
which lays claim only to interest and thus does not insert itself into
the equalization of the rate of profit. This capital rapidly becomes
fictitious once revenues are "capitalized" on the basis of a rate of
interest.

The next act in the process of socialization of capital is even more
directly connected to devalorization. When profits have become too small
and the appeal to the stockholders' capitals no longer suffices for the
enlarged reproduction of capital, it becomes necessary to seek long-term
credit. On a general level, capital itself pretends to overcome its
contradictions through its "transformation" into fiction.[^03]

Devalorization therefore means that financial capital takes control of
the entire economy. Financial capital, itself highly concentrated, plays
the role of "the general capitalist" in the same manner as the State
when it takes direct charge of the most devalorized sectors, yet even
more totally since credit becomes the nerve-center of production in all
sectors. The banking system is furthermore **very closely** linked to
the State, which, conforming to its nature, furnishes it support and
"control."

In the context of the workers' movement, the cooperatives (firms weak in
constant capital from the outset and whose expansion is limited to their
self-financing) then crumble exactly like **all** the firms with similar
organic compositions. Large numbers of workers' cooperatives are created
in periods when, due to a structural or conjunctural disorganization of
exchange, it is possible to create in semi-artisanal sectors (for
example, printing), firms with a very limited constant capital and a
decently paid qualified labor force. These periods have been: 1830-1848
and especially 1848-1850[^04], then the years 1919, 1936, 1945, insofar
as France is concerned.

Some mid-nineteenth century workers' cooperatives survived over a long
period although not without compromising their principles (for example,
by employing wage laborers who were not members). However, they do not
have comparably durable heirs today when the life span of 75% of such
firms does not go beyond two years.[^05]

It was also clear to Marx that a system of financing by credit was
indispensable to the development of cooperatives:

>"Without the factory-system arising out of the capitalist mode of
production there could have been no cooperative factories. Nor could
these have developed without the credit system arising out of the same
mode of production. The credit system is not only the principal basis
for the gradual transformation of capitalist private enterprises into
capitalist stock companies, but equally offers the means for the gradual
extension of cooperative enterprises on a more or less national
scale."[^06]

Furthermore, this was not only Marx's perspective, but that
of the 19th century workers' movement as a whole. (Unlike Marx, this
movement saw in this the establishment of socialism.)

In fact, the financing of cooperatives by credit turned out to be
impossible. The credit arising from the pooling of their not immediately
re-invested profits turned out to be quite insufficient, while their
insertion into the general credit system was impossible due to a lack of
capitalist credibility.

This practical impossibility due to the evolution of capitalism in
general, in conjunction with the breakdown of "producer-consciousness"
among the workers in most of the important sectors, created a crisis in
the workers' movement. A shift was nevertheless made, but it was made by
the unions which became **federations** representing **variable
capital** within the context of the national system and no longer
impelled by a "revolutionary" spirit nor the aim of creating
associations of producers-proprietors. Anarcho-syndicalism died -- or
very nearly -- with the cooperative movement. The unions, organs of real
resistance to Capital during the mode of **absolute** extraction of
surplus-value (lengthening of the working day), become integrated as
purely capitalist operations with the generalized passage to relative
surplus value.

The First World War, which covered a capitalist crisis, marks a split
between the **workers'** movement and the union movement, out of which
grew, for a time, the reality and the idea of "workers' autonomy." The
workers' councils, which appeared in Germany at the end of the war, not
only were manifestations of this autonomization produced by the
necessity to re-create a **resistance** to Capital's attack on workers'
living conditions, but they **also** are manifestations of a
**tendency** for the **proletariat** to constitute itself as a distinct
class, in a period when the reproduction of capital was blocked.

The specific role of the **unions, in their phase that could be called
social-democratic**, is explained by the fact that the contradiction
valorization/devalorization, which became omnipresent, was embodied in
**labor-power**, whose price the union negotiates while at the same time
controlling it. Thus, in addition to their role as managers of
labor-power[^07] they become promoters of reforms which confirm the
devalorization and aspire to the role of national managers of all of
Capital in times of crisis.

The contradiction does not appear **as such**, seeming inexistent or
resolved, in phases when the expanded reproduction of capital takes
place without difficulties. However, the union then virtually and
"theoretically" takes charge of this contradiction and elaborates reform
programs which fit in with the viewpoint of the **devalorization** of
Capital: a program of nationalizations of sectors with low profit rates
and, especially, the credit sector. But these reform programs only
acquire their full implications and appear plausible when Capital,
entering a crisis, is forced to recognize its contradictions which are
then visibly concentrated in the existence of living labor. It then
tends to become **immediately practical** for the union to take charge
of this contradiction.

The CGT was formed out of these "old" unions in industries born during
the development and concentration of capitalism at the end of the 19th
century, which made syndicalism in general and anarcho-syndicalism
itself limited modes of organization.

Nevertheless, created at the very outset of the transitional phase in
France, between the two modes of the submission of labor to capital, the
CGT managed to preserve, at its foundation, some notably
anarcho-syndicalist traits (cf. the Charter of Amiens) which it quickly
abandoned once its integration was brought about by rallying to the
cause during the First World War.

In the years which followed the war, the CGT smoothly implanted itself
in the expanding public sector (whose expansion is immediately
contradictory: simultaneously a devalorizer because it is not productive
of profits and, as an infrastructure, absolutely indispensable for a
society tending to be capitalized); the CGT also implanted itself in the
private sectors which were connected to the former major industries
(railroads, mines) whose **nationalization** it has demanded since the
beginning of the 1920s.

The crisis of the 30s and the popular front of 1936 that was its
consequence publicized and diffused these demands which found their
satisfaction in the waves of nationalizations following the Second World
War: Capital launched its real domination over French society.

In the period immediately after the war, the CGT found itself entrusted
with various State responsibilities due to the promotion of several
union bureaucrats to governmental positions. As a confederation, it dug
in by taking charge of the capitalist contradiction resolved for a time
during the war, and then the nationalizations. Because of its new
situation, the CGT, **in reality**, was to exhibit the greatest
dependence on the State, which was penetrating more and more deeply into
all the machinery of the economy. Its feudal relationship to the
PCF[^08], begun during the depths of the crisis and definitively
accomplished by the end of the war, is the **consequence** and not the
cause, as some argue, of this management of the contradiction which
culminated in the realization of its program.

The CGT becomes increasingly unable to manipulate reforms for capital at
the heart of social movements. The relegation of the PCF to an
oppositional role once its task is accomplished, increasingly leads this
union to transfer workers' demands directly to the electoral realm with
the perspective of a reappearance of the CP in the management of the
State.

The 30th Congress of the CGT, in June 1955, openly expressed this
situation: "The majority (overwhelming: 5,334 against 17 in the
minority), following M. Benoît Frachon, decides to set aside the
**economic program** adopted in 1953, which had implied structural
reforms and especially new nationalizations (a program which is also
found in the "common program" of the political left), in order to
replace it with an **action program** consisting exclusively of
demands."[^09]

The CGT most often limits itself -- ritually -- to denouncing the
so-called "dangers" of the re-privatization of certain sectors such as
Régie Renault!

In crisis periods the CGT must even "liquidate" the "hardest fought"
workers' struggles, as this is a condition of the credibility of the
Left and of the CP in particular (without considering for the moment the
question of knowing if this credibility can concretize itself today in
the management of the State; in other words, if the counter-revolution
from now on needs this type of Left. In any case, it will be seen later
that the popular front as it appeared in the last crisis is no longer
**the** most appropriate form of the counter-revolution in France.)

From this point on, it is the CGT's confederal position that determines
its specific positions in conflicts and this occasionally leads to
divergences between the Confederation and this or that section of a firm
participating in struggles which "go too far."

#### 1.3.B. The CFDT and self-management

Once the program of the social-democratic unions had been realized in
the course of the crisis of the 30s, the last world war and the
reconstruction, Capital's contradictory process goes on at a higher
level and the few reforms of this type which were still possible no
longer suffice to resolve the developing crisis. From this point on, the
real importance of the problem of **management**, as well as the myths
connected to it result from the growing devalorization of Capital.

The management of a firm becomes a very **"technical"** problem: the
general fall in the rate of profit and the extreme interdependence of
markets prohibit the success of amateurism (or of the arbitrariness of
ownership).

The control of labor-power in particular takes on a **crucial**
importance, and, at the same time, the management of **one** firm
assumes a **social** scope, depending on the extent to which (unlike
what happened in the 19th century) the unification of the capitalist
process and the increasing interdependence become so tight that a
rupture at any one point of society rapidly leads to consequences nearly
everywhere. For example, the bankruptcy of Rolls Royce in England
immediately provoked reactions in Seattle, where an airplane requiring
Rolls Royce engines was manufactured. Similarly, should an enterprise
lay off its personnel, the revenues of a city or region are threatened.
In short, the general conditions of Capital today are such that each
fraction of Capital requires that all the others behave responsibly in
relation to the totality of Capital. (This economic responsibility, from
the boss's side as well as the union's, is the very **civics**
\[_civisme_\] of real domination: there is no longer any other manner of
participating in society, of being a citizen, than to "take charge" of
the problems of Capital in its totality).

However, the firm's management escapes the capitalist-entrepreneur, at
the same time that the ownership of capital escapes him, once stock
corporations and the generalized use of banking credit have been
established. Parallel to this dispossession, the management of the firm
passes to a board of directors theoretically representing the
stockholders, and is exercised by hired "managers" or "technocrats"
dependent upon banking groups who are no longer even fictitious owners
but merely the firm's creditors, but who nevertheless possess the real
power over the product and the reproduction of capital. In effect, as
the late Serge Mallet, theoretician of self-management, wrote: "the
taking over of the management of firms by a stratum of technicians
independent of the stock-holders is rendered possible only by the
incapacity of the boards of directors to confront, by means of the sale
of stocks alone, the costs of operation and the new investments required
by expansion."[^10]

In this movement of Capital, "the capitalist" must disappear, giving way
to the anonymous powers of credit on the one hand, and the hired
managers on the other. "On the one hand, the mere owner of capital, the
money capitalist, has to face the functioning capitalist, while
money-capital itself assumes a social character with the advance of
credit, being concentrated in banks and loaned out by them instead of
its original owners, and since, on the other hand, the mere manager who
has no title whatever to the capital, whether through borrowing it or
otherwise, performs all the real functions pertaining to the functioning
capitalist as such, only the functionary remains and the capitalist
disappears as superfluous from the production process."[^11] If he
nevertheless seeks to maintain himself, he is increasingly relegated to
sectors on their way to a slow death. The juridical form of property
becomes an obstacle which Capital twists around by reforms, but is
unable to suppress it because **private property** remains its necessary
presupposition, in the same way as the development of fictitious capital
collides with the law of value and seeks to "surpass" it without being
able to suppress it, because this would be to negate itself.

Furthermore, not only the management of the enterprise but also that of
financial capital itself tends to appear as a simple technical function
of a social sort. "We are proceeding toward a sort of divorce between
ownership and capital; capital is increasingly separated from ownership,
while it is diluted, concealed, or even presented as the ownership of
collective organisms in statizations, socializations, and
nationalizations which pretend that they are no longer forms of
capitalist management."[^12] By the game of fictitiousness, financial
capital also pretends that it is no longer a form of private property,
but rather an independent social regulator of the relations of
production which it claims to surpass.

However, this whole structure rests on real capital, on the law of
value, and the extraction of surplus-value. "The dynamic of the
capitalist process remains intact and under its most ruthless form: but
this economic relation is anything but new."[^13] This is the
relationship that engenders the proletariat. "The fact that the
investing capitalist can perform his function of making the labourers
work for him, or of employing means of production as capital, only as
the personification of the means of production vis-a-vis the labourers,
is forgotten in the contradiction between the function of capital in the
reproduction process and the mere ownership of capital outside of the
reproduction process."[^14]

But the union movement -- conforming to its nature as the representative
of variable capital -- by laying claim to national management, lays
claim to the management of each firm and increasingly diverges from the
entire developing proletarian base. In so doing it seeks to rejoin the
workers' movement, whereas the self-management movement differs
fundamentally from the cooperative movement; the common point, however,
is that, in the same way that the questioning of the **ownership** of
capital from the **workers'** point of view had formerly masked the
proletarian question of the destruction of capital (which includes that
of the enterprise form regardless of its owner), likewise today raising
the question of the **management** of capital masks that of its
destruction (which includes that of the enterprise form no matter who
its manager is).

The history of the CFDT sheds light on this renewal of the union
movement. At the beginning of the 50s, French capitalism underwent a
transformation which was only the continuation and full realization of a
tendency manifested before the war: the basic industries -- oil,
chemicals, and petro-chemicals (among others, but especially these) --
became by degrees the foundation of the new cycle of accumulation. It
can be stated that the CFDT was born (in 1964) principally out of the
implantation of the ex-CFTC in these new "key sectors" of industry.

To prove our point, it is sufficient to demonstrate the growing
importance of the **chemical union** whose general secretary, Edmond
Maire, became general secretary of the Confederation; we must also take
note of the recent promotion of J. Moreau, Maire's successor as general
secretary of the chemical union to a post in the **political** sector
within the executive committee.

Along with electronics, the basic industries are the sectors where, in
conformity with their nature, the automation of the production process
is pushed the farthest; a small portion of living labor is incorporated
there, of which the technicians and researchers constitute an essential
element.

Moreover, these are the sectors which experience most profoundly the
divorce between juridical property and capital because of the
impossibility of their self-financing.

Thus, the technicians, engineers and researchers find themselves
directly confronting management at the workplace: who is the best
manager, those who control the production process every day or the man
who is arbitrarily promoted to the management of the business because he
belongs, directly or not, to the banking group which is in **reality**
the owner?

Here we find, transposed to the final limits of capitalist production
(quasi-automation), the same professional indignation confronting the
"capitalists' qualifications" which had marked its dawn; but its content
is entirely different. In order to understand the ever-spreading demand
for (self)management as the fundamental demand first of the "advanced"
fringe of the CFTC and then of the CFDT, the best idea is to let Serge
Mallet, a pioneer in the matter, speak, as his remarks are sufficient in
themselves:

>"The specificity of working conditions in the firm (insofar as this
concerns the sectors in question), the link established between the
demands and the economic condition of the firm, the fact that the latter
may in itself be a powerful homogeneous unit of production even when its
various establishments are geographically isolated, increasingly force
the union to organize itself on the basis of the firm itself, in other
words, not the factory or the laboratory, but the firm, the complete
economic unit. A new organizational structure arises in the union
movement which will progressively replace the trade structure and the
territorial structure and will merge with the industrial structure by
debureaucratizing it."[^15]

To debureaucratize, in Mallet's conception, means to adapt unionism to
the new reality of the firm which renders the traditional structure
(represented at its best by the CGT) useless because it is inoperative.
Moreover, at this level of his analysis, he is in agreement with the
following journalistic expression of progressive management: "Just as it
must be certain of outlets when it manufactures for its market and of
the products it will sell there (this is the role of advertising), the
firm must also be certain of the labor supply in negotiating with the
representatives of the wage-workers... One of the reasons the unions
have found themselves out of step in recent conflicts is precisely that
they have been organized on the level of the industry: it is here that
they negotiate... We are witnessing an 'atomization' of social
conflicts: each will fight for itself, with its arms and objectives, and
it will be necessary to negotiate much more on the level of the firm;
but the leaders of the latter have become accustomed to arbitration by
specialists and their professional organizations. As this will no longer
be possible, they themselves will have to go to the negotiations and,
consequently, they will have to prepare themselves."[^16]

Mallet continues: "We are thus witnessing, alongside the political and
traditional front maintained by the parties and the social front
maintained by the unions, the opening of a third front in the perpetual
struggle of Capital and Labor: this is a matter of an economic front by
which the workers' movement contests the capitalist system, not out of
ideological choices or social demands, but out of the practical
experiences of the inability of this system to ensure the harmonious and
uninterrupted development of the productive forces. By the same process,
the traditional distribution of roles between the union movement and the
political movement of the working class is called into question, and the
unions as economic organizations are led to politicize themselves in the
true sense of the term, in other words not to echo in a dull manner the
electoral slogans of this or that political party, but to intervene in
an active way in the political life of the country with the means and
forms of action which are specific to them... The development of modern
society completely integrates the political and economic processes. It
is impossible for a serious syndical organization not to intervene
directly as a syndical power in political problems, insofar as it wants
to play its role as a syndical power effectively... Protection of
already acquired advantages today demands not the regulation of the
existing economic system, but the organization of the economic totality
in which the wage-workers will have to live. And economic demands of a
total character are obviously related to political problems in a modern
state."[^17]

He concludes: "The apathy \[_absenteisme_\] of the citizen, deplored
today by all good democratic consciences, is compensated for by the
development of a spirit of responsibility within socio-economic
organizations. This is probably the most interesting and serious
consequence of the evolution of firm-based unionism. In effect, we are
led to revise fundamentally all of our political habits and our
conceptions of democratic practices."[^18]

Mallet is only expressing in sociological terms the absorption of
politics and democracy by Capital, which destroys them as **particular
spheres of activity**. This movement takes place through the full
conquest of the State by Capital and reflects the level of its
contradictions:

Capitalism developed on the basis of the law of value within petty
commodity production, and it represents **value in movement**. As long
as its domination is only formal, it reactivates democracy by bringing
to the forefront the **producer** "liberated" by the bourgeois
revolution.[^19]

Once it is fully tied up to value, Capital enters into contradiction
with the basis of its existence. It tends continually to surpass it
**without being able to accomplish this**. Neither can it really
suppress democracy, so it **swallows it up**.

Because of the development of this contradiction, Capital henceforth
tends to confer citizenship through the productive act and the act of
labor in general (one who cannot sell his labor-power is not a "man"
according to capitalist logic).

At the heart of this movement, as Mallet suggests, the firm acquires all
of its omnipresence by emancipating itself simultaneously from juridical
forms of property and its own financing. This "autonomization" in turn
gives the firm its capacity to exercise its own planning, its
self-organization in terms of the fundamental and unique dynamic of the
system: valorization of Capital.

The intervention of the State becomes proportionately more important as
it increasingly functions through financial operations, either direct or
indirect.

The famous "**democratic planning**" elaborated by the CFTC since 1959
expresses this new stage of contemporary capitalist development. It is
democratic insofar as it takes into account this "autonomous" planning
of the firm; this "autonomy" from then on **forbids** any unilateral
centralized planning. At the level of the State, this planning would
consist especially of the organization of credit by means of its
complete nationalization: "if the State connected the few large private
business banks to the four credit banks that it possesses, it would
thereby entirely control French industry without resorting to the
slightest change in the theoretical ownership of the industrial means of
production. It remains to be seen who controls the State, whom it
serves!"[^20]

This sort of "control" over industry could result only from the
submission of the State to the sole capitalist dynamic -- the firm --
moving in a context of extreme devalorization.

This would produce the following absurdity: the firm, "emancipated" and
organizing all activity around itself and for itself, cannot respond to
the law of value! As these sectors of high devalorization (basic
industries) are the **key** sectors for accumulation, they differ from
their pre-war homologues which were, or consisted of, the sectors of the
**infrastructure**. Only the existence of transformation industries with
a sufficient profit rate has allowed these key sectors to be maintained
through the system of the equalization of profit rates and the conceding
of **excess profits**.

At such a level of contradiction between the forces of production and
the relations of production, the outbreak of a general crisis due to the
**over-all** impossibility of the expanded reproduction of capital must
lead to labor power itself taking charge of the contradiction, in other
words it **takes charge of itself**. This self-management is the result
of the proletariat's atomization inscribed in the "autonomy" of the
firm, as we have defined it above; this is a manifestation of the
necessity for a type of control over the proletarians which can no
longer be exercised by its first boss, but only by themselves.

But this atomization does not stop at the doors of the firm; the social
invasion of the firm is accompanied by the atomization of the
proletariat **in the entire society**: the crisis, in which value
becomes decrepit, and with it political democracy, will bring about the
promotion of the producer to the status of the only recognizable
citizen. Self-management will **necessarily be generalized**. (In the
latter part of this text, we will confront several concrete modalities
of the self-managed counter-revolution in the countries where it is a
possibility.)

For the time being this does not reduce the existence of the unions to
nothingness; on the contrary, as Mallet has shown, some of them have
come to take on considerable importance at the heart of the
counter-revolution. However, this very importance implies that, outside
of them, distinct organizations of workers (including some propelled and
controlled by them) are forming. Already during the Italian
mini-crisis[^21] of 1968-69, rank and file committees and other factory
councils appeared which took on and performed functions which the union
structure could no longer carry out.

This mode of existence of Capital is certainly not new, having existed
as a tendency since Capital achieved its real domination over the
labor-process in a given sector, but it is fully realized in the sectors
where this domination is complete. Once these sectors have shaped the
industrial totality (if only on the level of the organization of the
market), the preparation of **general** reforms becomes even more
**necessary** for Capital, so that these sectors can co-exist (as in
France and Italy) with sectors which are on the path to real submission
and to which they tend to confer their mode of management during the
passage to full submission. But, reciprocally, only these "archaic"
sectors, to the degree that the portion of labor which is incorporated
in them is still relatively large and implies a **movement of labor
power**, can **carry out** these reforms.

If the labor force's taking charge of itself in varying degrees is now
an immediate necessity, it is because the maturation of certain sectors
is today synonymous with **crisis**; the labor force can intervene only
through the evermore contradictory movement of value.

If the strength of the CFDT in the sectors of devalorization ultimately
represents a small part of its total strength:

a) its foundation, as a union, has for its origin this contradictory
dynamic of the capitalist social movement on which its own theoretical
and practical dynamic rests.

b) this dynamic utilizes such tools as localized and genuinely sectoral
conflicts of small productive units in generally "disfavored" regions,
where the CFDT has experienced a rapid growth. These conflicts are
usually marked by direct opposition to the right of ownership (sit-down
strikes, sequestration of officials, etc.). They are not the CFDT's
laboratories for experiments in self-management but, rather they
constitute the local starting points of the process of taking charge of
the crisis which is itself still localized.

The divergences between the CFDT and the CGT on the subject of the
common program of the Left reflect their respective positions: The CFDT
emphasizes social struggles in order to carry out the reforms of the
crisis, whereas the CGT submits to electoral politics. These divergences
are fully borne out in the present conflicts \[March 1974\], in
particular at Houillères in Lorraine, where they are transformed into
spectacular oppositions. The deepening of the crisis could cause the
confederal agreements, which were gradually established between these
two unions during the past few years to be called into question. This is
the time for the CFDT to affirm and demonstrate its union leadership in
the midst of the counter-revolution in formation; moreover, despite its
noisy declarations, the CGT has already adopted some significant
characteristics of the CFDT plans.[^22]

## Chapter 2: The Lip case

>"... This socialism would not be a matter of allowing the worker to
leave the factory with a pair of shoes slung over his shoulder; and this
is so, not because they would have been stolen from the boss, but
because this would represent a ridiculously slow and clumsy distribution
of shoes for all." -- Amadeo Bordiga, _Propriété et Capital_

When laid-off workers paid themselves wages by selling commodities
produced under their own management, their gesture was spectacular and
became famous. The Lip workers' struggle struck a blow against the right
to private ownership of the means of production and tended towards the
reappropriation of the product by the producers. Thus it seemed to
re-unite with a movement which had sought to transfer the management of
the social productive apparatus to the hands of the working class.
However this perspective was that of a **workers' movement** produced by
an epoch of class struggle when capital only formally dominated the
labor process and society.

If the struggle of the Lip workers could initially appear as a
manifestation of the workers' movement, it was because it had been
determined, in the context of the Lip firm, by social relations between
Capital and the proletarians which were largely identical to those which
had produced the workers' movement. But the much larger context of
national and international capitalist society has also shaped the
reality of this struggle: personal ownership of the means of production
has today become a barrier to capitalist production, which no longer
needs owners but only managers. In addition, the reality of the struggle
of the Lip workers does not fit in with the tendency toward
reappropriation, but much more with the tendency toward the management
of Capital by the workers themselves: Lip has become a bazaar for
self-management. Moreover, this happened without any conscious
intentions on the part of the Lip workers, who were merely demanding a
boss capable of guaranteeing their survival.

### 2.1. Lip, a factory during the epoch of real domination of capital

The Lip conflict occurred in a sector (watch-making) where Capital has
not yet achieved real domination. More exactly, the real domination of
Capital over the totality of society has not yet established the
specifically capitalist labor process there.

Formal submission historically precedes real submission. But in certain
branches of production "this latter form which is the most developed can
constitute in turn the foundation for the introduction of the
first."[^23]

In watch production the capitalist form of production corresponding to
the real submission of labor to Capital first takes control of the
production of components: this production is carried out by
machine-tools operated by the O.S. ("specialized workers"). The high
level of productivity in the production of components has allowed the
introduction of the capitalist form in watch-making through the formal
domination of Capital over the labor process: assembling watches, within
a single factory. (Before the period of manufacture, the assembling of
watches was carried on within the framework of an artisanal mode of
production, by the watch-making artisans of Jura and Franche-Comté, "the
traditional watch-making region.") As the capitalist mode of production
took control of the assembling of watches, its domination was initially
formal: the technical processes at this stage differed little from what
they had been during the artisanal mode of production. The assembling of
watches could be continued even after the workers had been expelled from
the factory: this shows the importance of human labor at this stage of
production. This manufacture rested on the skilled labor of the workers,
and it is certainly because Lip is the last watch-making factory that
its closing poses a serious employment problem: the Lip workers "could
never find another job corresponding to their skills."[^24]

Furthermore, factory production is based on a barely-developed division
of labor: it involves the production of the materials necessary for the
complete fabrication of a watch (this is the famous department of
mechanical production).

In essence, the Lip capital, operating on too limited a level,
incorporated a quantity of labor into its product which exceeded the
social average. The large American and Japanese manufacturers produce on
a scale of mass production: the size of their capitals allows them to
compensate for the fall in the rate of profit (engendered by the height
of their organic composition) by the mass of profit and by excess
profits because their greater productivity makes the equalization of
profit rates work in their favor. From then on, with the real domination
of Capital over society on a national and international scale, a crisis
of maturation had to affect the Lip capital, whose form of domination of
labor was archaic, manifesting itself within the framework of
manufacturing production: Lip would have to disappear as an independent
capital and as a manufacturer.

There was another archaic trait: the Lip capital was the property of one
concrete person, Fred Lip. As the owner of his capital, he sought to
oppose or at least slow down the maturation crisis which would
necessitate his **dispossession**. He tried to rationalize his
production by introducing a degree of Taylorism into the assembling of
watches and to diversify his activities by creating a machine-tool
sector and a military equipment sector. These attempts at making his
production profitable again were only palliatives. It is not (as it has
been said) because he was whimsical and blundering that he made
managerial errors: it is because the only consistent management would
have been to accept the integration of his capital into a vaster
organization and to abandon his manufacturing production; he was wrong
only in wanting to drag on the independence of his capital, and to
accomplish this he needed to find palliatives which have been labelled
"errors in **management**" (which certainly shows the ambivalent
character of the Lip conflict, a laggard struggle in the midst of an
advanced situation). These famous managerial errors were due only to the
defensive action of a property owner faced with the threat of his
dispossession.

Capital's ascent to real domination is accompanied by the dissolution of
personal ownership of capital. It is largely because French capitalist
society is in the process of carrying out this mutation that the Lip
case has had such an echo at all levels of the society. In the course of
the conflict, some representatives of Capital and the unions made a
critique of personal property, behind which and in defense of which
managerial errors may have been committed, errors whose social
consequences these representatives stressed: "The present law is the
all-powerful protector of the private ownership of the means of
production. Between the bosses who do not find their profits high
enough, and the workers who risk finding themselves thrown into the
street, the law acts to favor the former."[^25]

"The wage-earners must not suffer the financial risks of the failure of
a management."[^26]

"Managerial errors are often paid for later on by those who did not
commit them... It is intolerable to lead a firm to its failure, to pull
out in time, and for calm days to flow on while hundreds of wage workers
are threatened with unemployment."[^27]

To cure this inadequacy, the government passed a law guaranteeing the
rights of wage earners in case of bankruptcy, and the local authorities
were kept busy at the time of the conflict with the situation of
Besançon merchants facing the disappearance of 1300 jobs and numerous
sub-contracts.

It is known that Fred Lip did not avoid the progressive loss of control
over his capital: Ebauches S.A. took 33% of the stock in 1967, 43% in
1970, the majority in 1973. This gradual penetration by Ebauches S.A.
should have been accompanied by the transformation of watch-making
production from a single factory producing all of its materials and
components to an assembly plant supplied with components from other
branches of Ebauches S.A., thus establishing a greater inter-firm
division of labor.

From this point of view it would have been necessary to fire the excess
labor power: from 866 people, the watch-making personnel should have
decreased to 620.[^28] Giraud's plan retained the same number in the
watch-making sector; but he foresaw the creation of a box production
sector, permitting the reduction of the number of layoffs to a level
more acceptable to the striking workers. He was wrong in this matter, as
was proven by the rejection of the Dijon agreement.

But Giraud was also repudiated by the bosses, and if the workers had
accepted his plan he may have been unable to obtain the necessary
financing. The bosses reproached him for making too many concessions to
the work force:

>"M. Giraud is in the process of creating a monster for us," declared
one high-ranking official, quite personally interested in the settlement
of the Lip affair.[^29]

>"Only a total reorganization can return Lip to an equal footing in
terms of production costs, and thus in its commercial chances. But it is
already certain that this large-scale house-cleaning will not take
place," affirmed a watch-maker from Besançon.[^30]

On the eve of the Dijon agreement, François Ceyrac's wariness was clear:
"It is necessary that the head of the firm maintain his freedom in the
realm of employment."[^31]

Giraud's plan suffered from another shortcoming in the eyes of the
bosses: it sought to do without Ebauches S.A. But the latter is the
largest European manufacturer of separate watch parts, so that its
participation at Palente is far and away the most profitable situation;
moreover, it was Lip's principal creditor.

To review how Lip's debts were incurred: 30 million[^32] to Ebauches
S.A.; 15 million to suppliers (watch-bands, cases); 10 million in bank
loans.[^33] To do without Ebauches S.A. therefore meant repaying the
debts, and the Giraud plan thus needed financing of at least 40 to 50
million francs. With such a financial handicap linked to a productive
sector in which the labor force was too numerous, the project was doomed
to fail.

The Interfinexa plan of November 1973 suffered from the same financial
drawback. Its financing was 40 million because it, too, wanted to do
without Ebauches S.A. and to make an appeal to the French watch-making
industry.[^34] The Société Générale refused to finance this plan, and
one would have to be a Mr. Rocard[^35] to think or say that this refusal
was motivated by political reasons.

The Interfinexa-Bidegain-Neuschwander plan, which had been adopted by
the bosses, and which the workers were finally forced to accept, for
want of any other possibility, itself calls for loans of 10 million in
private capital and 15 million in State aid[^36] to which must be added
a balance of 2 million from the wildcat sales!

This plan marks the reintegration of Ebauches S.A. as a protagonist in
the business, and improves the economics of the financing and the
perspective of profitability: the new capital is going to operate at
double the scale of the previous one; Neuschwander stipulates that the
objective is to manufacture a million watches a year, whereas production
has only been 500,000.[^37] This is the solution to the crisis of
maturation through the accession of Lip's watch production to real
domination.

It is also the solution, from the vantage point of Capital's interests,
to the contradiction at the heart of the Lip workers' demands: they
wanted a good management of capital which would protect them from
lay-offs, but a good management could be nothing other than the
accession of the Lip capital to real domination, and this had signified
the firing of the excess labor force. The Neuschwander-Bidegain plan
effectively "reconciles" the two poles of the contradiction by
subordinating the more or less complete reintegration of the workers to
the successful functioning of the new firm.

The other demand, non-dismantlement, has also been solved in terms of
Capital's interests. The Ornans machine-tool sector has been independent
since November 1973 and, at Palente, watch-making and military equipment
have been taken over by a holding company, a juridical structure placing
capital and profits in common, which does not allow any technical
connection to exist in the domain of production.

This section cannot be ended without pointing out that "the Société
Européenne of Watch-Making and Mechanical Development" includes
primarily representatives of French capital such as B.S.M.,
Rhône-Poulenc, Sommer on its board of directors, all of which operate in
the chemical and petro-chemical sectors: we have seen in the previous
chapter the position and significance which these sectors acquire in the
framework of real domination of Capital.

### 2.2. The workers' movement at Lip

>"The classical socialist goal is the abolition of wage labor. Only the
abolition of wage labor can bring about the abolition of capitalism. But
not having been able to abolish wage labor in the sense that the workers
see the absurdity and backwardness of selling their labor power, the
socialist movement has, since it began, aimed at **the abolition of the
market economy**." - Amadeo Bordiga, _Propriété et Capital_

Whatever developed later, the Lip conflict's origins were unquestionably
proletarian in the sense that the firm's inability to carry on
capitalist reproduction meant the workers would be fired. As has been
often observed, the firm's difficulties in no way threatened the
survival of its owner F. Lip. By contrast, the workers' means of
existence were directly threatened and, what is more (as we have said)
the workers were unable to find elsewhere similar types of work in which
they would be employed in the same way. To survive they were forced to
react. But how? We shall see that the unfolding conflict was determined
by the workers' fundamental isolation which can be looked at from two
points of view, capitalist and proletarian.

First of all, from the proletarian point of view, the company's
inability to carry on the cycle of capitalist reproduction involved "the
Lip proletariat" but not the rest of society, and it is evident that
that isolation is the real reason for the Lip workers' defeat relative
to their goals, and for their non-radicalization. It is also for this
reason that while attempting to defend their income they were led to
compromise with capitalism. But they had no choice and it would be wrong
to suppose they could have chosen more radical methods. They acted in
conformity with their **real isolation** from other workers in struggle
against the loss of their livelihood. To do it, they were forced (among
other things) to put together small social reserves (seizure of stocks
of finished watches and parts, solidarity funds). The illegal **means**
they used might lead us to believe that some sort of radicalization
might have become possible as the conflict developed, at least if the
unions didn't succeed in betraying the developing radicalization. But
that would be to give the unions a power they didn't possess; since the
**content** of the illegal acts was the formation of stockpiles -- which
could only be turned into money -- it precluded a subsequent
radicalization involving, at least potentially, the destruction of
capital and wage labor. And thus the workers fell back into their
isolation as workers. Only a movement taking root in the sectors which
are specifically capitalist would have allowed them to go beyond the
intrinsic limits of their struggle, and would have thus negated its
purely proletarian character while carrying it one step further. This
sort of solidarity evidently would have been the opposite of the
political solidarity of the advocates of self-management of every stripe
who wanted nothing more than to reinforce the Lip workers' fixation upon
their own isolated firm.

In the absence of any real solidarity movement the workerist character
of the struggle prevailed over its proletarian origin as the conflict
developed. In their isolation the Lip workers were unable to go beyond
the immediate conditions they had faced from the outset, and it was from
this narrow basis that they rushed into struggle. Attached to their
isolated factory, they strengthened their consciousness of themselves as
producers, and attempted to realize in practical terms that
consciousness. They resumed the production of watches. The "Lips" -- and
that is the origin of their disgusting popular nickname -- became a
collective capitalist.

What is remarkable and, at the same time, most characterizes Lip at its
highest point as a workerist movement is that the workers in struggle
attempted to negate in practical terms the consequences of the closing
of their factory (in other words the suppression of wage labor) by
paying **themselves** their wages as they had been accustomed to think
of it before June 12, the date it was announced by the company that
wages would be suspended: "We have been paid our usual wages which the
old bankrupt management owed us."[^38]

But it wasn't only a question of financing the strike by producing and
selling watches as the workers at Cerisay sold the blouses they had made
with their own resources, or the Bouly workers (who made stockings and
collars in a factory at Fourmies) who decided to exploit their hobbies
to raise a solidarity fund: "some knitted, crocheted, sewed, while
others did woodworking and blacksmithing; the products thus obtained
were put up for sale"[^39] -- but it was above all a question of
assuring their wages. Not only was the sum of money -- as the Lip
workers understood it -- identical to their former wages, but, in
addition, "each worker or employee received his pay envelope regularly
filled with an accounting of deductions for insurance, social security,
pension fund..."[^40]

The guaranteed wage was thus carried out to the letter in the form of
"wildcat pay" and this was entirely in accord with the will of the
workers themselves.[^41]

In effect, there were three ways in which to see the amount of money
each worker would get: 1) an equal amount for everyone; 2) the usual
salary less a percentage; 3) the usual salary with a solidarity fund to
which everyone could give what he wished. The last of these solutions
was the one chosen.[^42]

Certainly, as B. says in the interview cited above, the union delegate
supported this solution but it would be wrong to believe that the
adoption of this measure would have resulted from a vote by the workers'
general assembly. Proof of this was given by those interviewed: "Since
we had some dough why should we accept the lowest level..." -- "if the
boss gave us 200,000 why have only 150,000?"

To be sure, a higher level could have been envisaged for some, but they
would have been accused of irresponsibility in frittering away the
firm's capital and this would have been opposed to the general sense of
the struggle. "No firings" meant maintaining salaries and nothing else.
"The usual pay for all the workers, that was really something, and I
think it would be good if it was done that way; and the second (the
usual pay less a percentage) also, and... **I'm just as happy now
getting whatever they can give me**."[^43]

Moreover, the price at which watches would be sold is also significant;
this from the Lip catalogue published by the factory: "the sale price of
the watches includes the price of parts, value-added, tax, depreciation
and replacement of machinery, the workers' salary and even the owners'
profit."[^44] But what could be the objective reason for such a choice
since the workers didn't have any intention of accumulating capital; but
also, if they would have been able to sell all the watches, for example,
at the same price, what model for pricing would they use? There were no
other reasons for their decisions about salary and price than their
desire to have everything go on as before: the preservation of their
wages required the preservation of the firm's capital. "No to firings,
no to dismantling" meant "safeguarding the enterprise,"[^45] in other
words the enterprise's capital. In the cycle of capitalist reproduction
the various values that make up the total capital are related to each
other by the necessity for the total capital to go through the cycle of
reproduction.

From then on the Lip workers couldn't assure their usual salary by
selling watches at any price -- not that it would have been impossible
for them to finance the struggle -- because that would have destroyed
the relationship between the price of the watches and their normal
wages; and to have destroyed that relationship between price and wage
would have destroyed the cycle of capitalist reproduction and thus led
to the firm's liquidation; just the opposite of what the workers wanted.

Just as the price of the watches couldn't be determined outside of the
cycle of capitalist reproduction, so too the workers' wages couldn't be
paid without some sort of effective control over the way in which the
workers spent their time. At the Ornans factory the workers continued to
clock in every day when work began. At Palente, control was not so close
but it still existed at the general assemblies. "You know," a worker
said at Mutualité (December 12), "it would be unjust if some received
pay but only appeared at the plant on pay day." There, in a nutshell, is
the consciousness of the producer, the honest worker expressing himself.

In the end the workers continued to wear their work shirts long after
the factories were closed and to exhibit those work shirts at support
meetings held all over France. It is perhaps this small detail that best
reveals the producer consciousness which characterized the Lip conflict
as a struggle of the workers' movement, and the backwardness of this
movement in relation to the dominant forms of current proletarian
resistance such as absenteeism and sabotage.

However, a capitalist enterprise cannot be revived by production alone.
Capital continues to exist only when it runs through its cycle of
reproduction in a harmonious manner. Saving the wage, that is to say,
the firm's capital, by starting up production makes no sense unless the
rest of the cycle of reproduction is functioning. Thus the necessity of
marketing the watches.[^46]

A "wildcat" or "parallel" market quickly sprang up that was
simultaneously a watch market, a formal solidarity fair and a bit of a
racket. To sell their watches the "Lips" were led to employ modern
marketing techniques[^47], which circumvented the retailer (thus the
protests by watchmakers and jewelers) and which allowed them to increase
their margin of profit. The "Lips" sold their watches at political
rallies, at their friends' houses just as Tupperwear is sold at social
gatherings or door-to-door. Additionally this watch market was one of
the unproductive expenses as with any other capitalist undertaking. In
particular it was necessary to pay for the workers' trips which were as
often made to sell watches as to popularize the struggle (popularization
= public opinion = publicity). If it is indeed true that travel expenses
were not covered by sales but by contributions given in solidarity[^48],
then self-managed Lip had still another economic trump card (besides its
marketing methods) since the travel expenses couldn't be charged to the
firm's capital.

But unfortunately for the "Lips" the Left's goodwill market quickly
reached its inherent saturation point. The narrowness of the goodwill
market in fact conformed to the Lip enterprise's unprofitable character.

This parallel market was at the same time an **ideological**
marketplace. In exchange for the watches sold the Lip workers received
all sorts of encouragement and advice to continue the struggle.[^49] The
support meetings and political rallies gave various political tendencies
a chance to try out their self-management or workers' control
propaganda. This ideological marketplace was the _sine qua non_ of the
struggle. The workers could only take the advice as **ready cash** and
watch while little by little the spirit of the struggle was focused into
the image of an enterprise now running on a new basis: self-management.
As one interviewed worker said:

>There are some people who went to Marseilles, some guys who were in
Lyon, everywhere they were made to feel like they were big men. They
returned with their heads full of a million projects and ideas that come
from everywhere. They thought that their ideas should be carried out and
thus fell out with the men here who were under pressure from the unions
-- the CGT or CFDT -- and who were completely demoralized.[^50]

To attribute the Besançon workers' lack of enthusiasm to union pressure
would be to mask its real character. The hard reality the workers ran
into upon returning to Besançon with money from watch sales was that
**their money could not be converted into additional capital**. The
second phase of the cycle (the conversion of commodities into money)
could be carried out, more or less, but it was only half effective since
the third phase of the cycle (the conversion of money into productive
capital) comprised the conversion of money only into variable capital
and not constant capital. This then was the living reality of the "Lips"
at Besançon -- a reality which the unions only reflected. These limits
didn't result from the failure to generalize self-management but, on the
contrary, originated with the "logical absurdity" of the struggle:
workers' self-management of a bankrupt enterprise. With the enterprise
in such a state the "Lips" could do nothing more than fall into the same
rut as their former boss.[^51]

There was nothing more for the travelling salesmen to do than to leave
once more for other saturated markets: "there were fellows like P., for
example; one day he returned with us from Paris, the next day he left
again for Lyons. Then he returns from Lyons, he stays here a day, gets
edgy, disgusted. He leaves again for Marseilles, returns the next
morning. And having to plan all this crap besides."[^52]

The above leads us to the second aspect of the Lip workers' isolation.
From the **capitalist** point of view, the political or ideological
goodwill accorded Lip by the government or the owner does not exclude
abandoning the firm economically. For several years Lip had demonstrated
its inability to maintain itself within the capitalist community. And
for capitalism there is no solidarity that counts except the law of
profit. To be profitable once again, it was necessary for Lip to go
through a thoroughgoing restructuring.

Proof of this is to be found in the sum (about two million francs) which
because of their respect for the continuity of the cycle of reproduction
the "Lips" were led into giving up to the new owners in addition to the
remaining stocks. This is what they had accumulated in seven months of
work. If we recognize that this sum covers only one month's wages (for
900 workers), if we compare this amount with the 15 million owed the
suppliers, then we see to what extent the organic composition of the Lip
capital had diminished and how unprofitable it was.

To be sure the "Lips" as a collective capitalist stuck it out longer
than did their old boss. This resulted from the differences between
themselves and the old boss, and from the exceptional character of the
situation they had created. They had no reason to take charge of the
entire cycle of "their" capital. The "Lips" could take advantage of the
fact that only a fraction of the capital went through a rapid cycle
(circulating capital, which is to say wages, raw materials, parts). They
denied the basic problem, however: the rotation of the total capital.
They were never obliged to renew the constant capital nor did they make
good any of the debts contracted by the old management. Moreover they
renewed the stock of parts only to the extent they were able to do so.
All this added to the advantage they had over the old management --
which we mentioned above. Far from proving the superiority of the
"Lips'" management they demonstrated, instead, the impossibility of
successfully managing the Lip capital on the old basis.

### 2.3. The union question

Much has been said about the unions' role in the Lip business: the
disagreements between the CGT and the CFDT, the relationship between the
CFDT and the nonunion action committees which were formed. While the
CFDT immediately took charge of the struggle, promoting in large measure
the action committees and cautioning against illegal acts, the CGT
groaned about its usual demand for "the right to employment," claimed it
was being, as usual, realistic, and in the end was driven off the scene
by converging forces. The unions' activities seemed to be devoted to
wedding the workers' movement to the union movement, and could have
restored a bit of luster to old "revolutionary unionism."

In fact, beneath the surface of their respective statements, the
dissension between the CGT and CFDT at Lip did not result from a real
**choice** between modes of action that each would have made, but from a
**constraint** resulting from the outstanding differences that had
generally existed between them and which were faithfully reflected in
the particularities of the Lip situation. At Lip we simply witnessed the
clearest expression of the differences between the CGT and CFDT which
were forced into public view by May '68 and which were more or less the
same afterwards on the occasion of certain strikes (notably Joint
Français). The CFDT's managerial pretentions were clearly concretized at
Lip by its preparation and publication of plans, in contrast to the
CGT's deliberate silence on the subject. At the risk of being entirely
discredited among the workers, the CGT was forced into tail-ending while
discretely criticizing, more or less constantly in this case, the
"adventurism" of the CFDT.

The momentary return of union unity during the Dijon negotiations, where
the unions accepted firings as a matter of principle, coincided with a
renewed divorce, also completely provisional, between the workers'
movement and the unions, since the facts once again raised the
fundamental question, for the workers (who seized upon it as
proletarians), of the firing of the excess work force. For the CFDT, it
was but a secondary question.

Sensing the rank and file's upcoming rejection-and since the CFDT
couldn't exist without the support of the rank and file -- the CFDT was
forced into a quick about-face and once again adopted at the October 12
meeting the position of the Action Committee against all firings and did
not put to a vote the contents of the Dijon compromise (firings with a
guarantee of re-employment), which it had defended only the day before.
This sort of quick turnaround was, to be sure, made possible by the
CFDT's position "close to the rank and file."

The creation of an Action Committee at Lip might have been surprising at
first, in part because in recent years in France no strike, even the
most lengthy and bitterly fought, had involved the birth of a separate
workers' organization save for a few ephemeral strike committees; but
above all because the CFDT apparently was completely involved in the
struggle.

We have seen that because of its nature the CFDT was led to support the
creation of such committees as soon as the workforce took charge of
itself. Lip is a concrete example of this phenomenon in an isolated
context.[^53] By taking over itself, the Lip variable capital, in view
of capitalism's total reconquest, required an organization which at one
and the same time would emanate from the CFDT and yet possess a certain
amount of autonomy from it, since the content of this sort of activity
lay temporarily beyond the bounds of negotiating the price of labor
power -- which is the fundamental task of the unions. At certain moments
this relative autonomy can be transformed into virtual opposition; this
results from its very nature as was the case during the brief period of
time between the Dijon agreement and the meeting of the consultative
general assembly. But the movement toward autonomy was no real
expression of the Action Committee's having gone beyond the union; with
respect to the content of the action -- saving the enterprise -- there
could be no rupture. The union always had in its hand the key to the
problem. To demonstrate this, it suffices to notice the final, unanimous
acceptance of the Neuschwander-Bidegain plan (see above) which
concretized the final, total defeat of the proletarian origin of the
conflict by its capitalist content; this defeat was inherent in the
beginnings of the conflict, as we have seen; and since it was
irreversible, the only outstanding questions were when and how it would
occur. Thus the problem of firings, essential in the rejection of the
Dijon agreement, seemed to disappear suddenly in the acceptance of the
Dole agreements. The only qualification attached by Bidegain and the
unions in elaborating a new plan at this level in no way explains the
apparent sudden reversal. Their qualification was, on the contrary, the
natural result of the social relation of forces that were established at
the beginning of the reconstitution of the capitalist cycle.

The creation of the Lip Action Committee and the practice upon which it
was founded unquestionably reflects **the end of the workers' movement
as a progressive historical force**. In effect, in struggle the
dismissed workers could only free themselves from the unions' grasp in
two ways: in a reactionary way (tendency to return to small-scale
production and distribution via markets), or on a revolutionary
communist basis (destruction of value, wage labor, the enterprise itself
and the market). These were, in sum, the scenarios put forward by the
councilist Ultra-Left, which could only lead to disaster.[^54] "We make,
we sell, we get paid -- **it's possible**" the Lip Action Committee sang
along with the confused Ultra-Left and Maoist tail-enders who helped
with a good deal of the publicity. But no, **it wasn't possible** The
development and socialization of the productive forces by capitalism
**forbid** any return to any such low level mode of production and
mercantile exchange, unless, in limited or general crises (with other
developments), it is used as a means of hiding the impossibility of
continuing the cycle of capitalist reproduction. In that case, the end
of the workers' movement immediately has as its content the legacy of
this development: the reconversion of its theory and practice into the
**potential counter-revolution**.

This should astonish only those who haven't taken into consideration the
historical movement or the direct link between revolution and
counter-revolution.

## Chapter 3: Crisis and self-management

>"This is the road to be taken: first, to motivate the workers more than
they are now. That is to say not to allow nine hours of work to go by
without a meeting so that each worker understands what is happening in
the enterprise as a whole, where it is going, why we work, what it means
for society. Then it will be necessary for society to respond to the
workers' aspirations... There might be some guys who take on
responsibilities, there might be responsibilities that are rotated; when
one takes on responsibilities something happens; one then learns to
accept many other things; if one understands why, then one can very well
accept many other things." - Charles Piaget, _Lip Interview_

### 3.1. The workers' community and the human community

Besides self-management, much has been said, with respect to Lip, about
human warmth, the rediscovery of the joy of living, etc., not only in
the large meetings and solidarity marches (we already have seen what
they stand for), but also within the enterprise itself. These ideas
appear again and again in the interviews with the "Lips"; we finally can
know ourselves; everyone was able to express himself... Even many of
those who recognized the limits of the struggle let themselves be
carried away by the carnival atmosphere at the beginning; they believed
something of that atmosphere would be maintained and that the form of
the "Lips'" struggle had a "dynamic" all its own, independent of its
limited content.

In fact the archaic character of the productive process of the Lip Watch
Co. not only did not stop the workers from wanting to safeguard their
enterprise by any means possible but also allowed them to form a
homogeneous group confronting the personified enemy: **their** boss.
When the boss went bankrupt and disappeared because of the uncompetitive
character of **his** capital, the workers found themselves with their
tools and their production process negated and inert. The requirement
that they start up the production process themselves could only be
sustained by the sort of enthusiasm that affirmed a new-found sense of
community.

Any sort of breakdown within a community sooner or later leads to the
formation of a new community which, at the outset, provokes enthusiasm
within the newly formed community. For the workers of the Lip Watch Co.,
however, the break with their previous community was profound not only
because as proletarians they were deprived of the means of subsistence
(which was the **origin** of their newfound sense of community) but
especially because they could **once more make use of** the objects and
motions which they had been deprived of; the reformation of the Lip
community as a collective capitalist on the basis of the disappearance
of the "exterior" constraint of bosses, directors, etc., must have
induced quite suddenly a tremendous feeling of enthusiasm.

First of all, we can directly compare this sort of fraternization with
the fraternization which marked the formation of workers' cooperatives
in the nineteenth century and, more recently, the numerous communities
of work which arose in France at the end of the last war. In fact, even
at this simple level, there are fundamental differences, but before
taking them up it is necessary to understand the points of similarity
and their origin.

The communities of work that emerged from the war developed in areas
where the destruction of productive forces had been great, and in those
sectors of production where there was little constant capital at the
outset. In a general way, the rebirth of such communities in a form
approximating workers' cooperatives, was made possible by the
**rejuvenation** of operating capital during the war combined with the
generally archaic character of French capitalism as a whole.
Proclaiming **equal** wages and equality in management, the few
individuals involved in these new productive units evidently believed
quite sincerely that they were founding **socialist enterprises** in the
manner of the nineteenth century workers' movement! A good example of
this is furnished by the community of work Boimondau (makers of Dauphine
watch-cases) at Valence in the Drôme.

This community was founded by Christian socialists, anarcho-syndicalist
and other socialist militants who were known in the Resistance in
Vercours (the Drome and Ardéche region witnessed a tremendous
destruction of men and materials thanks to this important Resistance
cell). It involved a watch factory around which was build a city housing
this mini-capitalist collective and its family. The ensemble of
factory-habitations was given the evocative name Watch City. General
assemblies were regularly held to take collective decisions on
everything from the running of the enterprise to leisure time; for
example, an attempt was made to establish "sexual liberty" **by
decree**.

Similarly, at the new Lip there was a tendency to create a communal life
organized around the enterprise: meetings, sandwiches, little festivals
were held, it seems, almost daily.

But there the comparison ends because if, at Boimondau, there was a
**real** equality of wages at the outset, at Lip we have seen that the
preservation of a wage hierarchy was an imperative necessity in the
creation of the collective capitalist: at Boimondau the framework of the
general **re-accumulation** of French capitalism allowed the worker
community to take shape in relative "purity." However, the impossibility
of capitalist reproduction at Lip could allow the Lip collective to
exist only as a "bastard" workers' community.[^55] Boimondau was a
product of the **destruction** of the forces of production. Lip was
created by their contradictory **development**. At Lip no new enterprise
was born. Rather the old was saved by a sort of modernization.

Rocard in vain declares, to justify this sort of management, that
several hundred communities of work were created just after the
war[^56]: some sociologists have in vain exhumed the Boimondau
experiment.[^57] However today the idea of the commodity labor power
taking control of its own situation has an entirely different meaning.

For the same reasons another fundamental difference appeared: in
addition to outside organizations and groups of militants the Lip
workers were joined by numerous outsiders from the Palente section of
Besançon and from other parts of France.

This concentration at Palente had two complementary origins: French
society being capitalist, Lip's survival, as we have seen, was a vital
imperative for the city and surrounding region. Additionally, this
material community could only develop in contradiction with its own
bases; it could no longer organize, in its usual form, the totality of
human beings which it pretended to include in itself (e.g., hippy
communes, etc.). Those not part of "marginal communities" were subject
to the contradictory movement involved in the decomposition of social
relations: hence the growth of "delinquency." The instability of
capitalism's material community[^58], profound origin of its intolerable
character, makes every type of breakdown attractive, even if it is
carried out on the reactionary basis of wage labor and the appropriation
of the product for sale on the market by the producer himself, as was
the case at Lip.

The violent battles following the occupation of the factory by the CRS
\[national guard\] can be considered as a sort of proletarian outpouring
-- not an expression of solidarity in defense of the factory itself
(those arrested said they came "to see" or "to enjoy themselves"), but a
violent expression of a desire to take part in a breakdown when the
occasion presented itself.[^59] It was no accident that many of those
sentenced had delinquent records. Moreover, such events have occurred
more or less regularly for several years whenever the conditions for a
riot or the smallest disturbance have existed. That is the origin and
the content, apparently inexplicable, of the violence distinguished by
its "hooligan" stamp -- thus its profundity and limitation.

In effect, contrary to the Lip workers, the mass of proletarians
expending their labor power in specifically capitalist processes of
production are so interchangeable that the existence and life of this or
that enterprise is of no concern to them. Thus as anonymous victims of
the rising organic composition of capital, they find themselves
unemployed (often for the young this means there is no possibility for
them **to enter** the **global** productive process), they feel no
compulsion to organize against a specific antagonist.[^60] The enemy
which has victimized them is not any capitalist in particular but
capitalist society as a whole which they perceive more or less
confusedly.

Without a generalized crisis, the rejection of labor power is nothing
but one of the necessities of reproduction for global capitalism. These
proletarians form an industrial reserve army necessary for capitalism's
general expansion since they exert a pressure that keeps wages down;
however, the **fundamental** difference between the nineteenth century
army of the unemployed and the present one is that the latter can gather
in the most developed capitalist metropoles as relatively stable
communities of lifetime unemployed limited in size only by the extent to
which the productive forces have developed with respect to the relations
of production. Thus over the last twenty years in the U.S.A. there have
developed ghettos of black proletarians who can manifest, by their
uprisings, as in 1965, their need for a human community; but these
revolts immediately reached their limit and were checked by the
impossibility, in that period of general expansion, of attacking the
heart of capitalism: the relations of production.

However, in the absence of a general crisis, the weakness of those
temporarily included as well as those permanently excluded becomes a
**potentially** revolutionary force when the crisis embraces all of
society -- that is to say when the movement to devalorize ends up by
prevailing over the valorization movement and the capitalist mode of
production is forced to reveal its ruin.

Because the general crisis has at its root the nature of capitalism
which consists of **accumulation by autonomous enterprises**, the
proletariat can form itself as a class only by overcoming the enterprise
(and no longer as groups within the enterprise) to create a **unified**
mode of production freed from the detour between production and
consumption created by exchanged value, and which **reveals** its
absurdity during a crisis.

The proletarian mass, undifferentiated by its work, which incorporates
in a banal way this "class within bourgeois society which at the same
time is not a class of bourgeois society" in the crisis finds itself
constrained to break the last link and can no longer reproduce itself as
a category of Capital. This class-in-itself tends to organize itself as
a historical party which affirms its future in the **human community**;
this class has no "future" save in its own suppression. The formation of
the human community is the result of the development of the productive
forces by the community of Capital and is the **only historically
possible** supersession of Capital's community. In integrating this
development by which it radically transforms work, the human community
destroys in a positive manner the ideology of work, which capitalism had
made into something negative: labor time **finally** disappears as the
sole measure of social wealth to the benefit of "free time."

In fact communism carries with it the end of the division of labor
time/leisure time by fusing all activity into activity necessary for the
production and reproduction of humanity; the resulting fusion would
consequently not be carried out on the basis of the labor of men
alienated into citizen-producers as was the case in the worker
community. Thus **timed** production of time-producers which was the Lip
Watch Co. is doubly negated in the good company of money.

But if the organization of the proletariat as a class-for-itself
directing itself toward the construction of the human community tends to
be as much a product of the global development of capitalism as it is a
product of the inability of capital to reproduce itself, the result
isn't **automatic or inevitable**.

>"Let us rebuild the ENTERPRISE by means of self-management, and not
destroy it..." - Serge Mallet, _La nouvelle classe ouvrière_

>"Socialism resides entirely in the revolutionary negation of the
capitalist ENTERPRISE, not in granting the enterprise to the factory
workers." - Amadeo Bordiga, _Propriété et Capital_

### 3.2. The self-managed counter-revolution

In capitalist society revolution and counter-revolution form a linked
pair though radically antagonistic to each other. The two are joined in
the contradictory movement which is indispensable to capitalist
reproduction and at the same time fetters that reproduction. The crisis
which is simultaneously the explosion of the contradiction and the
beginning of its resolution thus implies the continual emergence of
revolution and counter-revolution.

The two are carried forward by the dominant movement of devalorization:
the counter-revolution, because this important devalorization is then
**necessary** for a later revalorization; the revolution because such a
period of devalorization broadcasts its decrepitude.

Consequently, while the revolution must cut short any later
revalorization, the counter-revolution must **first of all** take over
devalorization with the hope of rationalizing the contradictions.
However, given the depth of the present contradictions, the
counter-revolution can only develop one perspective for a capitalist
resolution: the massive destruction of productive forces.

This development thus implies that the revolutionary movement might be
inhibited and sporadic revolts might not attain their objectives and be
crushed (consider the repression of revolts in little developed or
underdeveloped capitalist nations which have already suffered the first
violent blows of the crisis: Greece, India, Ethiopia, Bolivia, etc.).

On a more immediate level of proletarian activity and consciousness
revolution and counter-revolution reflect the impossibility of
reproducing the capitalist community which, on a global scale, has
disorganized the life of the disoriented proletarians. The dissolution
of the form of consciousness corresponding to material conditions in a
state of auto-destruction implies the formation of a new consciousness
reflecting new conditions.

For the proletariat within a crises-riddled capitalism, the dissolution
of a consciousness linked by ideology to a self-valorizing Capital is
immediately translated into the raised consciousness of being a class
**without reserves**, possessing only its labor power.

Forced to take steps to reproduce its lost means of existence -- or to
reproduce a much lower standard of living because of the brutal fall in
real wages-the proletariat sees in the situation it confronts the
possibility of two types of responses:

1. a spontaneous tendency to personify the historical movement of the
productive forces that signals the superannuation of the capitalist mode
of production and calls for a communal organization on a human basis;

2. a tendency to locate the origin of all these evils in secondary
capitalist phenomena that mask the roots of the contradiction and hinder
the historical movement.[^61]

A superficial anti-capitalism is born which feeds on various ideologies
and which the earlier dissolution of consciousness aids in developing.
These ideologies share a common desire to resolve the crisis for the
proletariat by economizing on proletarian revolution and by putting
forward a mish-mash of reactionary and reformist measures. They reflect
a tendency towards communitarian reform on the thin basis of lingering
capitalism.

Thus the fascist and democratic responses (popular front) to the crisis
of 1929-30 implied an unprecedented holding on to the principle of wage
labor just at the moment when wage labor was in the process of
self-destruction. This was made possible by the destruction of the
revolutionary movement.

If the proletariat is **the class of consciousness** the breakdown of
its alienated community will neither result from nor automatically
involve the rise of a new mode of production. Unlike previous
revolutionary classes, the proletariat is not supported by the
irresistible force of value, which it must **destroy**. To carry out its
work it has nothing but its humanity.

Hence the importance of revolutionary theory in the communist movement.
"Class of consciousness" doesn't mean that "the revolution first occurs
in the head" as various academics and other modernists pretend. They
only reflect capitalism's tendency to suppress every form of social
activity and social existence for a growing portion of its slaves. The
"importance of theory" doesn't mean the proletariat has to be forced to
become conscious, as all sorts of militant pedagogues have attempted to
do (for example, to say to the Lip workers that they can or must
transcend their practice).[^62] Very simply, communist theory, inherent
in the contradictory movement of Capital, will tend to be produced on a
more spontaneous and broader scale than at present, at the level of
practical revolutionary measures to be taken.

Today as the traditional figure of the capitalist entrepreneur tends to
disappear completely, the depth of the crisis is signalled by the fact
that in some countries self-management is becoming a plausible
counter-revolutionary force. Doubtless it is only one of the components
of the counterrevolution and probably will coexist with or oppose other
forms, but it is possible to outline the practical function of
self-management already evident from the inherent character and content
of the crisis. If the depth of the crisis determines the extent to which
the work force takes charge of itself, then self-management (which is to
say the reorganization of the crisis of capitalist society) can develop
only in the industrialized countries where the organic composition of
capital is not very high, notably **France and Italy**. The crisis is by
definition a lack of profit. In these countries the proportion of
variable capital is still large enough so that during an initial period
it might be possible to struggle against the disappearance of profits by
radically lowering the value of the work force. To be sure, this also
would be done in countries with a very high organic composition of
capital, but with the difference that the role of living labor being
relatively small in those countries, they would not require a type of
social organization especially adapted to this objective. As we have
seen, in these countries -- especially the U.S.A. -- the logic of excess
profit is already included in profit itself.

Self-management is a way of having the work force control the
contradiction between valorization and devalorization because all
society would then be organized to lower the value of that living
commodity, labor. It is a question of the population taking over
activities previously run by Capital and which consequently increase the
expense of the upkeep of the work force. We can already partially see
the content of this sort of self-management in diverse parallel survival
networks formed in recent years (parallel schools, unofficial nursery
schools, clinics, food coops, etc.). It is significant that with the
beginning of the crisis the mass media have begun to publicize some of
these experiments (for example the favorable presentation of "free
clinics" on the television program of March 31, 1974).

At the level of the enterprise, self-management develops at first in the
sectors where the low rate of profit cannot be compensated for by
raising productivity via an increase in the technical composition of
capital since the crisis is, precisely, a lack of capital necessary for
such investments. However, an increase in productivity can be obtained
by further subjugating the work force to the production process: by
eliminating various forms of proletarian resistance to the real
domination of capital (absenteeism, sabotage) it is possible to increase
the intensity and speed of the work process. Various attempts at "the
enrichment of work" and especially the organization of autonomous work
groups (Donelly, General Food, Volvo...) fall into this trend since they
result from capitalism's difficulties with valorization since the end of
the 1960s; they remain, however, very limited experiments inasmuch as
capitalism has yet to reproduce them on a global scale.

The deepening of the crisis, by raising the issue of self-management,
will generalize and widen such experiments which must be given an
adequate framework.[^63] From this perspective, new profits will be
obtained from the increased productivity and the decrease in
unproductive costs, since self-management, as the name implies, consists
of conferring part of the tasks of managing capital to the work force
itself.

Thus within the enterprise self-management's inherent function is not to
lower the value of the work force but to be the adequate framework, the
form in which the work force is militarized and is adapted to this sort
of rationalization of production.

In this hypothetical development, that is the victory, if only
momentarily, of the counter-revolution, self-management attaches the
workers to the enterprise; it maintains the link which is essential for
the social fabric, while at the same time, it carries out a movement
transcending the enterprise -- a movement that transforms society into a
**community of poverty**. Concentrated self-management will be the
counterrevolutionary response to the potential transcendence of the
enterprise by interchangeable workers which self-management attaches to
and assembles within the popular, national state. In effect, if
self-management has as its chosen terrain the industrialized countries
with a low organic composition of capital, this is not only a result of
the productive structure of these countries but is equally determined by
the level of the world economy. Areas with a much higher organic
composition of capital always have more difficulties in finding the
profits necessary for the reproduction of capital, but their higher
organic composition allows them to manage in their own favor the
transfer of value in the course of exchange with less developed areas
(unequal exchange). This increase of value constitutes the excess
profits which are more and more necessary to them and which follow from
the fact that merchandise sold contains less work than that for which it
is exchanged. But for this transfer to work it is necessary for each
country with a high organic composition constantly to enlarge their area
which explains why the most developed countries are always forced into
free exchange (e.g., the U.S.A. and the agricultural Common Market).

As the need for excess profits increases in a crisis situation, the
countries with a high organic composition of capital will try to force
other countries into their exchange zone. But in a situation of
world-wide crisis, these other countries will be less disposed than ever
before to tolerate this flight of value, and will try to defend
themselves from this by organizing their **autarchy**. Self-management
will play a role in the organization of this autarchy and in the general
militarization of the population against the overdeveloped countries,
which will then be defined as the **enemy**. (This antagonism can
already be seen emerging today between France and the U.S.A.)

Self-management could thus well become a **war mechanism** for those
countries in a feeble economic position, a mechanism of the third world
war which such a conflict of interests can provoke.

Thus the sort of militarization of work and organization by neighborhood
that self-management represents at its base, would naturally extend to
the militarization, pure and simple, of the producer-citizen.
**Self-management exists only with respect to the totality and the
organization from top to bottom of all the capitalist categories**.

The rationale for such a "self-managed state" would be anti-imperialism
which it would exacerbate. The capitalist extreme left will be called to
play a central role in this war mechanism, as the evidence shows in the
patriotic mobilization in the Lip conflict and its support for one camp
against the other in the last Arab-Israeli War. It is significant that
in a party like the French Socialist Party which presents itself as a
government party, one fraction -- the CERES -- can be formed on the
bases of self-management and violent anti-U.S. imperialism. It is no
less significant that the French Communist Party itself believes that
"the way in which the question of self-management is posed today has
evolved positively," and "communists are second to none in the field of
self-management."[^64] Finally we must notice the purest Gaullist
faction at loggerheads with "U.S. imperialism" -- the "progressive
front" concurs entirely with the leftist organizations on the full gamut
of their programs (not to mention the royalists of the N.A.F. who have
proclaimed themselves partisans of self-management)

Self-management appears to be on its way to becoming the new form of the
Sacred Union.

However the autarchy of the self-managed countries threatens to
strengthen certain contradictions. If it is true that these countries
have on the average a low organic composition of capital, still we have
seen they also have highly developed enterprises which cannot have any
interest in autarchy. They also encounter hostility from other, less
developed branches of enterprise which cannot survive declining profits,
being at the heart of the crisis which is synonymous with the
liquidation of the smaller economic sectors. Thus a conflict of interest
arises over the way in which surplus value is divided up, the less
developed enterprises and sectors attempting to set up mechanisms to
shift the fall in value onto sectors with a higher organic composition
of capital.

This unequal exchange reflects the unequal development of different
regions which, with the emergence of the crisis, bring about an upsurge
of regionalist violence and; its corollary, theses about
"neo-colonization of the interior."

On a more acute level, these antagonisms could lead to a **capitalist
civil war** which would carry out a part of the destruction of
productive forces, the destruction necessary for Capital.

Self-management might also develop as a political or rather
**administrative** form of management of internal antagonisms. If we say
"administrative" it is because these insoluble conflicts of interest
would be one of the reasons for an authoritarian organization of
society. If today the counterrevolution in these countries implies an
unprecedented **participation** by the wage-slaves of capital in the
maintenance of their slavery, the integrity of all the essential
categories of the capitalist mode of production requires a superior
force (the metamorphosized but very real State) which links all the
separate parts and assures the cohesion of a chaotic society: any other
idea of self-management (as part of the bourgeois fiction of liberty and
equality) is nothing but a reactionary utopia, a dream that capitalism,
even "self-managed," is bound to explode.[^65]

Just as the social democratic program, elaborated during the festival of
capitalist reproduction (before 1914) was only a reactionary utopia
which finally was realized in the Popular Front and above all in Nazism,
so the crisis' imperatives can only be reduced by ultra-left schemas
into recipes for saving capitalism.

If the revolutionary proletariat's **autonomy** will be unquestionably
affirmed when it constitutes a **class-for-itself**, the
counter-revolution also implies a certain autonomy of the "proletariat"
as a class that maintains capitalism. Furthermore, with respect to all
the committees and other organs of the base that arise in the heat of
the crisis, it will be absolutely necessary to constantly appraise the
**content** of their activity, likewise the content of the movement of
which it is part without being diverted by the **forms** they might
borrow.

[^01]: Karl Marx, _Capital_, Volume III (Moscow: Progress Publishers,
  1966), p. 440.

[^02]: The profitable expansion of capital.

[^03]: _Entreprise_, No. 967, p. 56, gives an example of this
  transformation into fiction of a capital, that of British Petroleum:
  At a time (1972) when, for all the large oil companies investment
  needs increased while profits fell, B.P., in order to finance
  installations in the North Sea, resorted to a loan from a syndicate of
  banks which would be repaid after a delay of 5 to 10 years from funds
  coming from the sales of oil from this new source. B.P.'s new
  productive capital can thus function on an expanded level, whereas its
  money capital will only have attained the corresponding size in five
  years at the earliest.

[^04]: cf. G. Lefrancais, _Mémoires d'un révolutionnaire_, Paris: Ed. La
  Tête de Feuilles.

[^05]: cf. _Problèmes Economiques_, No. 1.357, January 30, 1974.

[^06]: _Capital_, III, p. 440.

[^07]: In developed states their role as managers of labor-power, which
  marks their integration as a machinery within capitalist society, is
  particularly clear in the establishment -- in collaboration with the
  managers of the total capital -- of periodic contracts for wage
  increases by branches of production.

[^08]: French Communist Party.

[^09]: G. LeFranc, _Le syndicalisme en France_, P.U.F.

[^10]: Serge Mallet, _La nouvelle classe ouvrière_, Paris: Seuil, 1963.

[^11]: _Capital_, III, p. 388.

[^12]: Bordiga, _Propriété et Capital_, Ch. 4.

[^13]: Bordiga, _Propriété et Capital_, Ch. 4.

[^14]: Marx, _Capital_, III, pp. 380-381.

[^15]: Serge Mallet, _La nouvelle classe ouvrière_, pp. 86-87.

[^16]: Report by Jean Boissonat, editor in chief of _L'Expansion_, to
  the European Commission, published in _Problèmes Economiques_, No.
  1272, May 17, 1972.

[^17]: Serge Mallet, _La nouvelle classe ouvrière_, pp. 102-103.

[^18]: Serge Mallet, _La nouvelle classe ouvrière_, p. 245.

[^19]: Democracy appeared along with the law of value at the time of the
  dissolution of primitive communities. Athenian democracy was the lot
  only of free men, only recognized citizens; the slaves, progressively
  becoming the principal producers, were excluded by the definition of
  the social being.

[^20]: Serge Mallet, _La nouvelle classe ouvrière_, p. 167.

[^21]: "Mini" in comparison to the generalized crisis which is coming.

[^22]: cf. especially the "democratic management" of the firm,
  democratic planning, in the new CGT perspective presented in the
  official organ of the CGT: _Le Peuple_, No. 927, October 16-31, 1973.

[^23]: Marx, _Un chapitre inédit du Capital_, Paris: Ed. 10/18, 1971,
  p. 201.

[^24]: _Lip_, Information Bulletin, published by the Publicity Committee
  of the Lip Workers, p. 9.

[^25]: cf. "Syndicalisme-Hebdo" (CFDT), cited by _Le Monde_, August 9,
  1973.

[^26]: Ceyrac, cited by _Le Monde_, September 21, 1973.

[^27]: _L'Expansion_, September 1973, p. 100.

[^28]: cf. Document 3, Ebauches S.A. plan of June 8, 1973, in _Lip 73_,
  Paris: Seuil.

[^29]: _Le Monde_, September 22, 1973.

[^30]: _Le Monde_, September 22, 1973.

[^31]: _Le Monde_, October 7, 1973.

[^32]: All figures in francs, 5 f = $1. \[1975 footnote\]

[^33]: _Le Monde_, August 14, 1973.

[^34]: _Le Monde_, August 14, 1973.

[^35]: Head of the Socialist Party.

[^36]: _Le Monde_, February 2, 1974.

[^37]: Cited in _Le Figaro_, February 7, 1974.

[^38]: _Lip Information Bulletin_, published by the Publicity Committee
  of the Lip Workers.

[^39]: AFP deposition, October 8, 1973.

[^40]: _Le Monde_, August 4, 1973.

[^41]: See Jean Lopez, _Lip interview_, 18 rue Favart, 75002 Paris,
  November 1973, pp. 27-31.

[^42]: Jean Lopez, _Lip interview_, 18 rue Favart, 75002 Paris, November
  1973, p. 30.

[^43]: Jean Lopez, _Lip interview_, 18 rue Favart, 75002 Paris, November
  1973, p. 31.

[^44]: _Lip Information Bulletin_, published by the Publicity Committee
  of the Lip Workers, p. 11.

[^45]: _Lip Information Bulletin_, published by the Publicity Committee
  of the Lip Workers, p. 9.

[^46]: The money for the "workers' pay" came only from the sale of
  watches produced after production was begun by the workers. Here then
  is an example of the Proudhonist idea of the right of the producer to
  his product. In a general way it can be observed that as the situation
  developed the workers' initial reaction in defense of their wages led
  to a mixture of archaic working class tactics and modern management
  techniques: thus the resumption of production in order to attain the
  superficial objective (the profound objective being the defense of
  wages) of demonstrating the importance of the workers' productive
  activity by contrast with the boss's superfluity that is truly a
  characteristic of the worker. The sale of the watches produced (which
  also was motivated by the desire to defend the wage) also demonstrated
  the workers' ability to manage things. It is, as well, by virtue of
  these self-management tendencies supported by the CFDT that watches
  and wages were invested with a price and a capitalist form (to the
  consternation of some Situationists).

[^47]: Between June 20 and November 16 the workers sold 82,000 watches,
  realizing a total of more than 10 million francs (figures furnished by
  Ch. Piaget, cited by _Le Figaro_, November 16, 1973). At the August
  24th press conference of the CFDT -- "Lip is viable" -- it was
  emphasized that the "sales committee" was ready to furnish precise
  information on the "nightingale" and "war horse" models and various
  esthetic improvements to be made on them. Moreover, the CFDT stated
  that "experience of direct sales to individuals and to factory
  committees merits serious analysis."

[^48]: cf. Charles Piaget, _Le Figaro_, November 16, 1973.

[^49]: The publicity put out by the Left, the New Left, the unions and
  others to prepare workers for the visiting Lip workers involved a
  simple slogan which had already proved its worth: "the Lip workers are
  fighting for all the workers" (therefore you have to support them and
  above all finance them), equivalent to "I drive for you" that the
  truckers put up to convince you to be patient with their heavy burden.
  So it goes in a society in which all activities cooperate in the
  reproduction of capital, where everyone has his job to do, not for
  pleasure, you can be sure, but because any single interruption would
  harm the general interest: the implacable logic of the situation to
  which every "man" of good will must agree.

[^50]: _Lip interview_, 18 rue Favart, 75002 Paris, November 1973.

[^51]: Indeed it seems that the conversion of money into means of
  production (materials) might have been foreseen: see _Le Monde_ of
  August 2, 1973: "according to those in charge of the production
  department \[...\] it will be possible to buy raw materials: we are
  studying various propositions which have been made to us." This sort
  of managerial logic also was behind the "Lip" attempt to start the
  entire cycle of reproduction: see _Le Monde_ of July 13, 1973: "the
  workers' collective added: we've established a plan for the year with
  a renewal of watch production and renewed activity in other sectors."
  The Palente factory evacuation of August 14 \[1973\] certainly put an
  end to their project. But the workers' inability to take over the
  cycle of capitalist reproduction did not result primarily from
  political opposition from the bourgeoisie but rather resulted from the
  unprofitable nature of the enterprise. Besides it is known that on
  July 12, 1973, Charbonnel, one of the government ministers, suggested
  that Lip become a cooperative. Among the arguments the CFDT advanced
  in opposition to this idea were some which linked the inevitability of
  the bosses' political hostility with their opposition to an enterprise
  directed by workers (see _Le Monde_, August 21, 1973). That the
  cooperative wouldn't work was due, in the first place, to its
  inability to show a profit. In fact, the CFDT only too well understood
  the situation, and their delegate, Roland Vittot, in his answer to
  Charbonnel, stressed that the unions were rejecting the ministers'
  suggestion since he foresaw "a decrease in employment" not because of
  errors of management made by the old directors, but because Lip,
  inevitably, would have to become an assembly line in order to survive.

[^52]: _Lip interview_, 18 rue Favart, 75002 Paris, November 1973.

[^53]: We should note, if only in passing, the role played by "Cahiers
  de Mai", which took over, for the most part, the bulletin _Lip Unité_
  (Lip United). For several years now this group appears every time the
  workers show a little autonomy vis-à-vis the unions. "Cahiers de
  Mai's" organizational flexibility permits it to be an ideal
  complement, indeed a palliative, for the union's practice, to which
  they are immediately linked by their exclusive attachment to one
  factory (as compared to the "classical" political groupuscules). In
  1972 at Pennaroya, for example, in the absence of the union, they
  organized from beginning to end the strike of immigrant workers. Once
  the conflict ended they then helped organize a union local in the
  factory. The apparent ambiguity of the "Cahiers de Mai" in its
  critique of the unions (taking them to task for "divisive"
  hierarchies), at the same time recalls the group's function of
  stimulating unity among an atomized rank-and-file and also recalls its
  origin in May of 1968. May '68 has too often been lauded for its
  anti-bureaucratic and anti-authoritarian dimensions. Now and then the
  limits of this one-dimensional view have been pointed out. It remains
  to show that on this level the movement also anticipated certain
  counter-revolutionary characteristics of our epoch which correspond to
  the crisis of French capitalism's maturity which, to some extent, May
  of 1968 revealed.

[^54]: Even at the very moment when it was evident that they were
  enjoying unprecedented publicity using techniques borrowed from the
  dominant modernism (see, in particular, the republication in paperback
  of the complete works of Chaulieu, alias Cardan, alias Castoriadis,
  etc.).

[^55]: The accumulation of capital at Boimondau marked the end of the
  self-management experiment. Little by little, the wage hierarchy was
  reestablished; one, or rather two owners emerged from the community.
  The enterprise set up new wage scales on new bases. These low wages
  were the making of one of the two enterprises which employed convicts
  upon their release from prison. Most of the employees lived outside
  Watch City which had nothing communal about it but its name (many
  workers were fired after May '68 for having gone on strike). The
  enterprise lived on in agony and after many ups and downs was finally
  liquidated, sold, in 1970. (information about the enterprise, here
  given very briefly, was provided by an old Boimondau worker who
  witnessed the end of the communal self-management period and a comrade
  who worked there shortly after '68.)

[^56]: _Le Monde_, January 29, 1974. As for the many offspring of this
  worker community only a handful survived more than a few months or
  years since most were an immediate, palliative response to the
  disorganization of post-war capitalism and to the momentary absence of
  capitalist investors (who also appeared, in a way, at the "Lip
  community").

[^57]: G. Friedman in _Le Monde_, March 22, 1974.

[^58]: The tendency of capitalism to form material communities after
  1945, incarnate in the Welfare State in the USA, is not the same thing
  as the disappearance of internal antagonisms, nor the creation of a
  **real** community of men, even if alienated. On the contrary, that
  capitalism is **forced** to found such communities in its metropoles
  is the result of the ineluctable development of its contradictions
  (evaded beforehand by the adoption of Keynesian theories) and has as
  its content the extreme fragmentation of society into atomized
  individuals. Just as giving commodities a value (valorization)
  includes the destruction of value, so Welfare, by its nature, contains
  the personified contradiction of capital-the living proletarian. "The
  bourgeoisie lets the proletariat fall so low that it must feed it
  rather than being fed by it" (_Communist Manifesto_, 1848). In fact,
  beyond the bourgeoisie of 1848, Capital, as a social relation,
  collides with the proletariat and is **incapable** of creating a
  harmonious community. To speak of a "material community" is to
  acknowledge the impossibility for the "capitalized" proletarians
  (during the postwar cycle of expanded reproduction) to form themselves
  into a distinct class; such a situation turns "traditional"
  revolutionary militancy into a disaster, transforming it into simple
  racketeering. But the crisis of capitalist reproduction will provoke
  the destruction of the material community and simultaneously speed the
  reorganization of the counter-revolution to a degree equalling the
  degree of social disorganization: self-management wherever feasible;
  another reason for specifying precisely the type of organization now
  developing.

[^59]: For _Révolution Internationale_ (in No. 5, New Series, B.P. 219
  75827 Paris Cedex 17) the confrontation with the CRS marked a class
  unification and the passage from economic to political struggle,
  because the workers had gone beyond the framework of the factory.
  However going beyond the framework of the factory in itself is not
  enough to determine the proletariat (or a fraction of it) as a **class
  for itself**, unless it occurs on a virtually revolutionary basis (was
  it to defend the collective capitalist of Lip that the class would be
  formed?!). In fact the enterprise's existence could not continue
  anywhere; the formation of the proletariat is implied only in going
  beyond the dynamic of capitalism-the reproduction of capital. But, on
  the contrary, the Lip workers constantly went beyond the limits of
  their locality in making trips here and there without ever going
  beyond their enterprise whose preservation was the very content of
  their struggle. R.I.'s way of seeing things results from its
  fundamentally **political** conception of the communist revolution
  with its corresponding partyist outlook.

[^60]: See, for example, _Le Monde_, April 2, 1974: "The Lulus of
  Abbaye," and "Employment Difficulties for the Young in the South."

[^61]: In reality this twofold tendency is likely to become manifest in
  the form of antagonisms and proletarian fractions personifying first
  one, then the other, like the one which arose in Germany in 1919-21
  and which was only reinforced by the development of contemporary
  capitalism. (See _Négation_ No. 2, _Intervention Communiste_ No. 2,
  and _Bulletin Communiste_ of May, 1973. H. Simon, B.P. 287, 13605
  Aix-en-Provence.)

[^62]: The text "Critique du conflit Lip et tentative de dépassement" [A
  criticism of the Lip conflict and an attempt to transcend it], (P.
  Laurent, 32, rue Pelleport, 75620 Paris) is an example of that
  **programatic** conception of communist theory: in part it explains to
  the workers what **they are supposed to do** and not do. The diversion
  of _Lip Unité_ (of unknown origin but reproduced by Quatre Millions de
  Jeunes Travailleurs, B.P. 8806, 75261 Paris Cedex 06) substitutes
  itself, pure and simple for the Lip workers in order to make them say
  what they should have done if [...] if what, in fact? This manner of
  working tends to conceal the programatic conceptions of the above. In
  general, the diversionary method expresses the impossibility of any
  sort of (even a potential) revolutionary affirmation of a movement. It
  is not by accident that this method was set up as a "subversive
  practice" by the Situationists in a period when the proletariat was
  totally under the domination of Capital.

[^63]: The crisis of the 1930s, when there was no question of
  self-management, saw in German shoe factories the suppression of
  assembly line work which had just recently appeared. This
  "de-rationalization" -- a new rationalization adapted to the crisis --
  was then a vain attempt to compensate for unemployment. (See Carl
  Steuerman \[pseudonym for Otto Rühle\], _La crise mondiale_, Paris:
  Gallimard, 1932, p. 50.)

[^64]: _l'Humanité_, February 15, 1974.

[^65]: It is clear that the work force, on this level, cannot at the
  same time be both agent and object of Capital; also the role of agent
  would naturally be taken over in the self-managed State by a coalition
  coming from the most "progressive" fringe of economic and political
  managers (Bidegain, Neuschwander, J. Delors, Edgar Faure, for
  example), bureaucrats from the Left and New Left, including their
  trade unionist counterparts, not to mention a fraction of the working
  class drawn from the base via various committees and councils (Monique
  Piton and other members of the Lip Action Committee were given an
  audience by E. Faure -- doubtless taking care of the little man).
