---
title: Socialism and Religion
author: Pannekoek, Anton
date: 1907
description: Translated by Ernest Untermann for International Socialist Review, April 1907. From <https://www.marxists.org/archive/pannekoe/1907/socialism-religion.htm>.
...

## I

If we try to find a key for the mutual relation of socialism and
religion in the practical attitude of socialist speakers and writers and
religious spokesmen, we are easily led to believe, that the greatest
misunderstanding, confusion, and internal contradictions reign in this
regard. On one side we see that numerous laborers, when joining the
ranks of the socialists, also throw their theological faith overboard
and often combat religion fiercely; moreover, the teachings, which form
the basis and strength of present-day socialism, and which together form
a entirely new world conception, stand irreconcilably opposed to
religious faith. On the other hand, we see faithful adherents of
Christianity, even priests, demanding socialism precisely on account of
their Christian teachings and gathering under the banner of the labor
movement. And all agitators, and, what is still more significant, all
programs of international socialist parties, unanimously declare
religion to be a private affair of individuals, in which others have no
business to interfere. Nevertheless most priests and official
representatives of religion combat the social democracy very zealously.
They contend, that this movement aims merely to exterminate faith, and
they harp unctuously upon all statements of our great champions Marx,
Engels, Dietzgen, in which they make critical remarks about religion and
defend their own materialism as a scientific doctrine. This, again, is
opposed by comrades in our own ranks, who, relying upon the declaration
of neutrality toward religion in our party program, would prefer to
forbid the spreading of such statements, which hurt the feelings of
religious people. They say that the goal of our socialist movement is
purely economic. In that respect they are right, and we shall not fail
to repeat this again and again in refutation of the lies of the
preachers. We do not wish to inoculate people with a new faith, or an
atheism, but we rather wish to bring about an economic transformation of
society. We desire to displace capitalist production by a socialist one.
Any one may realize the practicability of such a collective production
and its advantages over capitalist exploitation, for reasons which have
nothing at all to do with religion. To this end we want to secure the
political power for the working class, since it is indispensable as a
means to this end. The necessity, or at least the desirability, of this
transfer of the political power can be understood by any laborer from
his political experience, without any further ceremony, regardless of
whether he is in matters of faith a Protestant, a Catholic, a Jew, or a
Freethinker without any religion. Our propaganda, then, is to be
exclusively devoted to the work of elucidating the economic advantages
of socialism, and everything is to be eschewed, which might run counter
to the prejudice of religious minds.

Evident as this conception may be, at least in its first part, yet it
has its drawback, and there will be few, who will agree with the
ultimate conclusion. If it were correct, and if it were our aim to
preach the beauties of socialism to all people, then we should naturally
have to address ourselves to all classes of society, and first of all to
the most educated. But the history of socialism has thoroughly disavowed
the utopian sentimentalists who wanted to do this. It was found, that
the possessing classes did not care about these advantages, and that the
working class became more and more accessible to this understanding.
This in itself indicates that something more has to be considered than
merely to prove to people the practicability of an economic
transformation of society. This transformation, and its instrument, the
conquest of political power by the working class, can only be the
outcome of a great class-struggle. But in order to carry this
class-struggle successfully to its conclusion, it is necessary to
organize the whole working class, to awaken its political intelligence,
to endow it with a thorough understanding of the internal forces which
move the world. It is furthermore necessary to be familiar with the
strength and weakness of the opponents of the working class, in order to
make the best use of them, and in order to be able to meet all
influences energetically, which might weaken the internal and external
strength of the organized army of workers. Only a clear grasp of all
political and social phenomena can preserve the present leaders and
members of the socialist movement from missteps and mistakes, which
might seriously injure the propaganda among the still unenlightened
masses. Only profound knowledge will enable them to wrest ever new
concessions from their enemies by their tactics and to benefit the
working class.

If it is a fact, that the greatest amount of knowledge and understanding
is required in our ranks for the purpose of waging our fight well, and
if the materialistic writings of our master minds tend to increase this
intelligence, then it would involve great disadvantages to try to
conceal and suppress these writings and conceptions for no other reason
than that of avoiding a clash with the prejudices of people of limited
knowledge.

Our theory, the socialist science founded by Marx and Engels, was the
first to give us clear glimpses of the different social interrelations,
which influence our movement. It will, therefore, be necessary for us,
to turn to this science for a satisfactory answer to the question of the
relation between socialism and religion.

## II

If we wish to decide upon our attitude towards religion, it will first
be necessary for our science to enlighten us concerning the origin, the
nature and the future of religion, and this enlightenment, like every
science, must be based upon experience and facts. Now we find in all
countries with a strongly developed socialist movement, that the mass of
class-conscious workers are without religion, that is, they do not
believe in any religious doctrines and do not adhere to any of them.
This seems at first sight all the more peculiar, as this mass has
generally received but little schooling. On the other hand, the
"educated" classes, that is, the bourgeoisie, return more and more to
faith, although there was at one time a strong anti-religious movement
among them. It seems, then, that belief or unbelief are not primarily a
result of culture, of a certain degree of knowledge and enlightenment.
The socialist workers are the first among whom irreligion appears as a
social mass phenomenon. There must be some definite cause for this, and
if this does not prove to be merely a transient fact, it must
necessarily result in a greater and greater restriction of the field of
religion by socialism.

Now the partisans of religion contend that this is not the case, for
religion, according to them, is something more and higher than a mere
theological faith. The devotion to an ideal, the willingness to make
sacrifices for a great cause, the faith in the final victory of the Good
-- all this is said to be also religion. In this sense the socialist
movement must even be called deeply religious. Of course, we are not
going to split hairs about words. We will merely say, therefore, that
this meaning of the term religion is not the customary one. We know very
well that the socialist working people are filled with a great and high
idealism, but with them this is not allied to a belief in any
supernatural power, which is supposed to rule the world and guide the
fates of men. We use the term religion only in this last meaning, that
is, as a belief in a god.

Now let us ask ourselves whence this faith comes, and what it signifies.
It is obvious, that the faith in a supernatural power, which rules men
and the world, can exist only to the extent that the actual forces
controlling the processes in nature and in the human world are unknown.
A Kaffir, who serves as porter in a South African railway station and
who suddenly hears the Morse apparatus starting to give signals,
believes that a god is concealed in it. He bows deeply before the
apparatus and says reverently: "I will at once inform the boss" (the
telegraph operator). This conception of the untutored man is quite
intelligible, and so is the fact that the primitive people believed the
nature around them to be filled with all sorts of mysterious spirits. In
their economy they depend wholly upon nature. Many natural forces and
unknown powers threaten their lives and their work, while others are
favorable, useful, benefiting to them. They have no means of knowing and
controlling those powers. These appear to them as supernatural, manlike,
forces with independent wills, and they seek to influence them with the
means of their limited mental horizon, with prayers, sacrifices, or,
perhaps, threats. The little general knowledge required for their
economy is intimately connected with their religious conceptions. The
priests owe their great influence precisely to the fact, that they are
the mental directors of production. Just as in their conception of the
forces of nature elementary and crude empirical knowledge is mixed with
fantastic superstition, so their religious ceremonies form a mixture of
actions necessary in production and of actions wholly superstitious and
useless.

Civilized people are no longer influenced so overwhelmingly by the
forces of nature. Although it would not do to say, that they are
scientifically understood in the beginning of civilization, yet men are
more out of reach of their direct influence. Their methods of production
and of labor have become so developed, that men feel more independent of
natural events and are not so helpless against them as savages. When we
come to a later stage of civilization, to the age of capitalism, then we
meet with a rapidly developing natural science, which investigates the
forces and effects of nature systematically and uncovers their secrets.
By the application of this science in technique, the forces of nature
are even made subject to the production of the necessities of life. For
the modern civilized man, then, nature holds no more mysterious powers,
which might induce him to believe in supernatural forces. These spirits
of the past are tamed and pressed into his service as ordinary forces of
nature, whose laws and processes are known to him.

Nevertheless we find that the class, in which this culture and this
supremacy over nature are incarnated, has remained, or has again become,
religious for the greater part, with the exception of a strong temporary
current, of bourgeois materialism in the nineteenth century. Why is that
so? What reason have they for assuming the existence of a supernatural
ruler of the fates of mankind? In other words, what forces are there
that still strongly affect the existence of the bourgeoisie, and that
are still unknown in their origin and nature and therefore may still be
regarded by them as mysterious and natural forces? These forces are
derived from the social order. The adage says, indeed, that every one is
the captain of his own soul, but in practice most of the capitalists
find out that this is not true.

As an independent producer, the capitalist may do his best, he may
attend conscientiously and thriftily to his business, he may exploit his
employees thoroughly without any sentimentality, he may keep his own
expenditures within a decent limit, and nevertheless prices may fall,
until he has to sell almost without any profit, or even at a loss, and
in spite of his efforts the evil monster of failure creeps upon him. Or,
his business may be doing well, and he may be accumulating money at a
fine rate, when all of a sudden a crisis overtakes him and swallows his
whole business. How does this happen? He does not know. He lacks the
knowledge of political economy, which might enlighten him about the
fact, that capitalism necessarily must produce such great social forces,
which may lift the individual to high prosperity, if he is lucky, but
which may also destroy him. The origin of these forces is to be sought
in the fact that production is indeed social, but only in the form and
appearance of production depending on private enterprise and control.
The individual fancies that he is working independently, but he must
exchange his products with others, and the conditions of exchange, the
prices, and the possibility of exchanging at all, are decided by the
totality of social conditions. Production is not consciously regulated
by society. Its social character stands above the will of mankind, the
same as the forces of nature, and for this reason social laws face the
individual with the inevitability and cruel inexorableness of natural
forces. The laws of this artificial nature, of this process of
production, are unknown to him and for this reason he stands before them
just as the savage stands before the laws of nature. They bring
destruction and misery in many forms, occasionally also fortune. They
rule his fate capriciously, but he does not know and understand them.

The socialist proletariat stands before these forces with a different
attitude. It is precisely its oppressed condition which deprives it of
all interest in the preservation of capitalism and in the concealment of
the truth about this system. Thus the proletarian is enabled to study
capitalism well, he is compelled to make himself thoroughly familiar
with his enemy. This is the reason why the scientific analysis of
capitalism given in _Capital_, which is the life's work of Karl Marx,
met reluctance and little understanding on the side of the bourgeois
scientists, but was hailed with enthusiastic appreciation by the
proletariat. The proletarians find in this work a revelation of the
causes of their poverty. By its teaching they are enabled to understand
the whole history of the capitalist mode of production. They become
aware of the reasons, why it must inevitably be the fate of innumerable
small bourgeois to fail, why hunger, war, and the suffering incidental
to crises must necessarily follow from this production. But they also
see, in what manner capitalism must ruin itself by its own laws. The
working class understand, why by their insight and knowledge, they will
be enabled to displace capitalism by a consciously regulated social
production, in which no mysterious forces can any longer bring
destruction to mankind. The socialist portion of the working class,
then, stands before the social forces just as intelligently and
understandingly as the educated bourgeois stands before the forces of
nature.

Here, then, lies the cause of the irreligion of the modern
class-conscious socialist proletariat. It is not the product of any
intentional anti-religious propaganda. Nor is it the demand of any
program. It comes rather gradually as a consequence of the deeper social
insight, which the working people acquire by instruction on the field of
political economy. The proletarian is not divorced from his faith by any
materialist doctrines, but by teaching which enables him to see clearly
and rationally through the conditions of society, and to the extent that
he grasps the fact that social forces are natural effects of known
causes, the old faith in miracles dies out in him.

## III

In order to understand the nature of religion thoroughly -- and only a
thorough understanding will enable us to grasp its effects in present
society -- we must come to a clear conception of the nature of spiritual
things in general. It is in this respect that the philosophical writings
of Josef Dietzgen are so valuable, because they give us clearness about
the nature of the mind, of human thoughts, theories, doctrines, about
ideas in general. Only in this way do we fully realize our role in
social life and in the present struggle. Whatever is in the mind, is a
reflection of the world outside of us. It has arisen out of this world.
Our conception of things true and real is derived from our experience in
the word, our conception of things good and holy from our needs. But
these mental reflections are not mere mirrored pictures, which reproduce
the object exactly as it is, while the mind plays a purely passive role.
No, the mind transforms everything, which it assimilates. Out of the
impressions and feelings, by which the material world exerts an
influence upon it, it makes mental conceptions and assumptions. Dietzgen
has explained, that the difference between world and mind, original and
copy, is this, that the infinitely varied, concrete, ever changing flow
of phenomena, of which reality consists, is turned by the mind into
abstract, fixed, unchangeable, rigid conceptions. In these conceptions
the general, lasting, important, salient facts are detached from the
multicolored picture of phenomena and designated as the nature of
things. In the same way we spiritualize among the many things and
institutions necessary for our welfare those by terms good, moral, holy,
which are essential for satisfaction of our lasting, vital and general
requirements.

It is inherent in this nature of mental concepts and assumptions, that
although they are derived from reality, yet they cannot immediately
follow reality in its ceaseless alterations. When a thing has once been
gathered from experience as a mental copy, it becomes fixed in the mind
and remains there enthroned as a recognized truth, while new experiences
are crowding upon the mind, to which this truth can no longer be
reconciled. At first this truth resists, but gradually it has to submit
to modification, until finally, when the new facts have been accumulated
in crushing masses, it is overthrown, or thoroughly understood and
altered. This is the history of all scientific theories. The place of
the old is taken by a new theory, which then gives to the entire store
of material facts an abstract and systematic summarisation.

We are not so much interested here in the scientific theories, as in the
general conceptions concerning the nature of the world and the position
of man in it, which are incorporated in the philosophies and religions.
These are not theories abstracted from the experiences and special
observations of learned explorers. The facts on which they are built up
are rather the experiences and feelings of whole nations or popular
classes. They form their general ideas and conceptions out of their
experience concerning their own position in nature and in social
environments, particularly concerning the requirements of their life.
Wherever powerful unknown forces press upon them -- as we have indicated
before -- their conception of the world is dominated by supernatural
forces, and other conceptions are joined to this fundamental thought.
This was the case, until now, in almost the whole of history, with only
a few exceptions. In the religious doctrines, then, we find the general
primitive conceptions concerning the nature of the world and of the
relations of man to those unknown forces expressed in mystified forms.
Everything required for the maintenance or the interests of this class
of people then assumes the form of a divine law. When all hope of
improvement by self-assertion is gone, as it was among the ruined Roman
proletarians of the first centuries of Christianity, then meek suffering
without resistance and inert waiting for supernatural salvation become
the highest virtue. But when an energetic preparation for war is
required to keep hold of a conquered country and is accomplished by
success, as it was among the Jews of the Old Testament, then Jehovah
helps his chosen people and those obey his laws who fight bravely.
During the great class struggle in Europe, called the Reformation, every
one of the classes engaged in the fight regarded as God's will whatever
agreed with its class interests, for each could conceive only of those
things as being absolutely good and necessary which were vital for the
existence of his class. For the followers of Luther, who loved to serve
a prince, God's law, or God's truth, demanded obedience to authority;
for the free bourgeoisie of the towns it demanded Calvinist equality of
individuals and selection by grace; for the rebellious peasants and
proletarians it demanded the communist equality of all mankind. The
struggling religions of that period may be compared in a general way
with the political parties of the present day. The members of the same
class assembled in them, and in their congresses (councils) they formed
in the shape of confessions of faith (we would say programs nowadays)
their general conceptions of what they thought to be true, good, and
necessary, and what was consequently God's truth and God's will. In
those days religion was something living, deeply and intimately
connected with the whole life, and for this reason it happened
continually that people changed their religion. When a change of
religion is considered merely as a sort of violation of conventionality,
as it is in our day, it is an indication, that religion remains
untouched by the great social movement of modern times, by the struggles
which stimulate men, and becomes a mere dead husk.

With the development of society new classes and new class antagonisms
have arisen. Within the previously existing communities of the faithful
different classes, and antagonisms resulting from them, have grown up.
From the same stratum of small bourgeois, there have arisen great
capitalists and proletarians. The confession of faith, which was
formerly an expression of a living social conviction in a theological
garb, becomes a rigid formula. The community of faithful, formerly a
community of interests, becomes a fossilized thing. The mental
conceptions persist by tradition as abstract theological forms, so long
as they are not shaken by the strong gale of a new class struggle.

When this new class struggle comes, it finds the old traditional
antagonisms in its way, and then the fight between the traditional faith
and the new reality begins. The present actual class interests are
identical for the working people of different religious confessions,
while a deep class antagonism exists between laborers and capitalists of
the same religious denomination. But the new reality requires time to
overcome the old traditions. From a time, in which a religious community
represented a living community of interests, the association of members
of the same faith has been transmitted as a tradition, and a sacred
tradition of that. Because this association is the mental image of a
former reality, it persists as a spiritual fact and attempts to maintain
itself against the onrush of the new facts, which influence the mind of
the laborer by his own experience and by socialist propaganda. In the
end the old group of conceptions and interests, which has become a dead
husk, must yield to the new group based on present class interests.

Religion is, therefore, only temporarily an obstacle for the advance of
socialism. By virtue of the sacredness attached to its doctrines and
commands it can maintain itself longer and more tenaciously than other
bourgeois conceptions, and this tenaciousness has sometimes created the
impression that the faithfulness of the religious laborers would be a
bar to practical and a refutation of theoretical socialism. But in the
long run even this ideology succumbs to the power of reality, as the
Catholic laborers in Germany have proved.

## IV

The socialist teachings have inoculated the laboring class with an
entirely new conception of the world. The realization, that society is
in a process of continual transformation, and that misery, poverty,
exploitation, and all the suffering of the present are only temporary
and will soon yield to an order of society, to be inaugurated by his
class, in which peace, abundance, and fraternity shall reign, this
realization must revolutionize the whole world conception of the laborer
from the ground up. The theory of socialism furnishes the scientific
foundation for this world conception. Political economy teaches us to
understand the internal laws, which move the capitalist process, while
historical materialism lays bare the effects of the economic revolution
upon the conceptions and actions of people. And this stands
irreconcilably opposed, as a materialistic doctrine, to religion. The
socialist laborer who has recognized his class interests and has thereby
been inspired with enthusiasm for the great aim of his class struggle,
will then naturally desire to get a clear understanding of the
scientific foundations of his practical actions. To this end he is
acquainted with the materialistic doctrines of socialism. But it is not
merely on account of the satisfaction derived from a thorough
understanding, that is necessary for the socialist parties to promote a
thorough understanding of these teachings among their members. It is
necessary rather because such an understanding is indispensable for a
vigorous pushing of our fight.

The actual state of affairs, then, is just the opposite of what the
theologians believe and proclaim. Our materialistic doctrines do not
serve to deprive the laborers of their religion. They approach our
doctrines only after their religion is already gone, and they come to us
for a more profound and uniform substantiation of their views. Religion
does not flee, because we propagate the doctrines of materialism, but
because it is undermined by the simple new gleanings on the field of
economics, gathered by a careful observation of the present world.

In declaring that religion is a private matter, we do not mean to say
that it is immaterial to us, what general conceptions our members hold.
We prefer a thorough scientific understanding to an unscientific
religious faith. But we are convinced, that the new conditions will of
themselves alter the religious conceptions, and that religious or
anti-religious propaganda is unable to accomplish or prevent this.

Here lies the crux of the difference between our conception and all
former ones, between the present proletarian movement and former class
movements. Our materialistic theory has uncovered for us the actual
foundations of former historical struggles. It has demonstrated, that it
was always a question of class-struggles and class interests whose goal
was the transformation of economic conditions. Men were not clearly
aware of the material reasons for their struggles. Their conceptions and
aims were disguised by a mystic cover of eternal truths and holy
infinite aims. Their struggles were therefore carried on as struggles
between ideas, as struggles for divine truth in fulfilment of God's
will. The struggles assumed the shape of religious wars. Later, when
religion no longer occupied first place, when the bourgeoisie, fancying
that they could grasp the whole world by reason, fought against the
representatives of the church and nobility, then this bourgeoisie
imagined that they were waging a fight for the ultimate rational, for
eternal justice based upon reason. At that period the bourgeoisie
championed materialism. But as yet they understood but little of the
real nature of the struggle, and carried it on in that juristic
mystification, here and there as a struggle against religion. They did
not see, that this fight was nothing but a class struggle of the
bourgeoisie against the feudal classes, and had for its aim only the
installation of the capitalist mode of production.

In this respect our class struggle is different from all previous ones,
for by virtue of our materialist science we recognize it to be exactly
what it is, namely, a struggle for the economic transformation of
society. Although we feel the high importance of this struggle, and
often express it in our writings, that it shall bring freedom and
brotherhood to mankind, realize the Christian ideals of human love, and
emancipate human thought from the oppression of superstition,
nevertheless we do not represent this struggle as an ethical one for a
moral ideal, as a juristic one for absolute liberty and justice, or as a
spiritual one against superstition. For we know, that it is waged in
reality for the revolution of the mode of production, for the
requirements of production, and all other things are but results flowing
from this basis.

This clear grasp of the real nature of our struggle is expressed in the
declaration that religion is a private matter. There is no contradiction
between our materialist doctrine and this practical demand. They do not
represent two antagonistic points of view, which must be reconciled, in
the way that "considerations of practicability" must be reconciled with
"soundness of theoretical principle." No, just as our so-called
considerations of practicability are everywhere results of a clearly
understood theory, so it is here, as the above statements show. The
declaration that religion is a private matter is therefore an expression
of the clearly scientific nature and aim of our struggle, a necessary
consequence of our materialist theory of history, and only our
materialism is able to give a scientific vindication of this demand.
