---
title: Social Democracy and Communism
author: Pannekoek, Anton
date: 1927
description: First published as a pamphlet under the pseudonym K. Horner in Hamburg, 1919. Later published in the KAPD journal, Kommunistische Arbeiterzeitung, in 1927. This translation is based on the latter version. From <https://www.marxists.org/archive/pannekoe/1927/sdc.htm>.
...

## 1. The Road Followed by the Workers' Movement

The world war brought not just a violent revolution in all economic and
political relations; it also completely transformed socialism. Those who
grew up with German social democracy and participated in its ranks in
the workers' class struggle, will by confused by all its new features,
and will ask themselves if everything they had learned and accomplished
until now was false, and if they must therefore learn and follow the new
theories. The answer is: it was not false, but incomplete. Socialism is
not an immutable theory. As the world changes, men's theoretical
understanding grows, and along with new relations, new methods to
achieve our goal also emerge. This can be seen by casting our glance
back upon the development of socialism over the last century.

At the beginning of the 19th century, utopian socialism reigned.
Broad-minded thinkers deeply sensitive to the unbearable nature of
capitalism sketched the outlines of a better society, in which labor
would be organized cooperatively. A new perspective emerged when Marx
and Engels published the _Communist Manifesto_ in 1847. Here, for the
first time, the principal points of the socialism of the future clearly
stood out: it was from capitalism itself that the force capable of
transforming society would emerge, and this force would give birth to a
socialist society. This force is the class struggle of the proletariat.
The poor, scorned, ignorant workers will be in the forefront of those
who will carry out this transformation, as they take up the struggle
against the bourgeoisie, gaining in the process power and ability and
organizing themselves as a class; by way of a revolution, the
proletariat will conquer political power and carry out a comprehensive
economic transformation.

It must also be emphasized that Marx and Engels never called this whole
undertaking "socialism", nor did they call themselves "socialists".
Engels expressed the reason for this quite clearly: in that era, various
bourgeois currents were characterized under the name of socialism,
currents which, due to a feeling of identification with the proletariat
or other motives, wanted to overthrow the capitalist order; quite
frequently, their goals were even reactionary. Communism, on the other
hand, was a proletarian movement. The workers' groups which attacked the
capitalist system called themselves communists. It was from the
Communist League that the _Manifesto_ emerged, which pointed out to the
proletariat the goal and the direction of its struggle.

In 1848 the bourgeois revolutions broke out, clearing the way for the
development of capitalism in central Europe, and facilitating the
transformation of the small traditional statelets into more powerful
Nation-States. Industry expanded at a record pace during the 1850s and
1860s, and amidst the ensuing prosperity all the revolutionary movements
collapsed so completely that even the word communism was forgotten.
Later, during the 1860s, when the workers' movement reemerged in
England, France and Germany within a more fully-developed capitalism, it
had a much broader base than the previous communist sects, but its goals
were much more limited and short-term in nature: improvement of the
immediate situation of the workers, legal recognition of trade unions,
democratic reforms. In Germany, Lassalle led agitation in favor of
State-supported producers' cooperatives; in his view, the State should
act as the architect of social policy in favor of the working class, and
in order to compel the State to assume this role, the working class
would have to avail itself of democracy -- the power of the masses over
the State. It is therefore understandable that the Party founded by
Lassalle laid claim to the significant name of social democracy: this
name expressed the Party's goal, that is, democracy with a social
purpose.

Little by little, however, the Party outgrew its initial narrow
objectives. Germany's unrestrained capitalist development, the war for
the formation of the German Empire, the pact between the bourgeoisie and
the militarist landowners, the anti-socialist law, the reactionary
customs and taxation policies -- all of these things drove the working
class forward, making it the vanguard of the rest of European workers
movement, which adopted its name and its policies. Practice honed its
spirit for understanding Marx's doctrine, which was made accessible to
socialists by the numerous popularized versions written by Kautsky and
their political applications. In this manner they came to once again
recognize the principles and goals of the old communism: the _Communist
Manifesto_ was their programmatic work, Marxism was their theory, the
class struggle their tactic, the conquest of political power by the
proletariat -- the social revolution -- their goal.

There was, however, one difference: the character of the new Marxism,
the spirit of the whole movement, was unlike that of the old communism.
The social democracy was growing within an environment characterized by
a powerful burst of capitalist expansion. It was not, at first,
compelled to consider a violent transformation. For this reason, the
revolution was postponed into the distant future and the social
democracy was satisfied with the tasks of propaganda and organization in
preparation for the postponed revolution, and contented itself for the
time being with struggles for immediate improvements. Its theory
asserted that the revolution had to come as the necessary result of
economic development, forgetting that action, the spontaneous activity
of the masses, was necessary to bring this about. It thus became a kind
of economic fatalism. The social democracy and the rapidly growing trade
unions which it dominated became members of the capitalist society; they
became the growing opposition and resistance of the working masses, as
the institutions which prevented the total impoverishment of the masses
under the pressure of capital. Thanks to the general franchise, they
even became a strong opposition within the bourgeois parliament. Their
basic character was, despite their theory, reformist, and in relation to
day-to-day issues, palliative and minimalist instead of revolutionary.
The principal cause of this development lay in proletarian prosperity,
which granted the proletarian masses a certain degree of essential
security, dampening the expression of revolutionary views.

During the last decade these tendencies have been reinforced. The
workers' movement achieved what was possible in such circumstances: a
powerful Party, with a million members and garnering one-third of the
vote, and alongside it a trade union movement concentrating in its ranks
the majority of organized labor. It then clashed with an even more
powerful barrier, against which the old methods were not so effective:
the potent organization of big capital into syndicates, cartels and
trusts, as well as the policies of finance capital, heavy industry and
militarism, all of which were forms of imperialism that were controlled
by forces outside parliament. But this workers' movement was not capable
of a total tactical reorientation and renewal, as long as its own
powerful organizations were arrayed against it, organizations which were
considered to be ends in themselves and were eager for recognition. The
voice of this tendency was the bureaucracy, the numerous army of
officials, leaders, parliamentarians, secretaries and editors, who
comprised a group of their own with their own interests. Their aim was
to gradually change the nature of the Party's activities while keeping
the old name. The conquest of political power by the proletariat became,
for them, the conquest of a parliamentary majority by their Party, that
is, the replacement of the ruling politicians and State bureaucracy by
themselves, the social democratic politicians and the trade union and
Party bureaucracies. The advent of socialism was now supposed to arrive
by way of new legislation in favor of the proletariat. And it was not
just among the revisionists that this position found favor. Kautsky,
too, the political theoretician of the radicals, said during a debate
that the social democracy wanted to staff the State, with all of its
departments and ministries, merely in order to put other people, from
the social democracy, in the place of the ministers currently occupying
those posts.

The World War also led to the outbreak of a crisis in the workers'
movement. The social democracy, generally, put itself at the service of
imperialism under the formula of "defense of the fatherland"; the trade
union and Party bureaucracies worked hand in hand with the State
bureaucracy and business to make the proletariat expend its strength,
its blood and its life to the utmost extremes. This signified the
collapse of the social democracy as a Party of proletarian revolution.
Now, despite the fierce repression, a growing opposition has emerged in
all countries, and the old banner of the class struggle, of Marxism and
of the revolution is raised again. But under what name should this
banner be raised? It would be completely justified to reclaim the old
formulas of social democracy, which the social democratic parties have
left in the lurch. But the very name "socialist" has now lost all of its
meaning and power, since the differences between the socialists and the
bourgeoisie have almost entirely disappeared. In order for the class
struggle to move forward, the first and most important matter to attend
to is to fight against the social democracy, which has led the
proletariat into the abyss of poverty, submission, war, annihilation and
powerlessness. Should the new fighters accept such infamous and shameful
names? A new name was necessary, but what name was more appropriate than
any other to declare its role as the principle bearer of the old
original class struggle? In every country the same thought arose:
reclaim the name of communism.

Once again, as in the time of Marx, communism as a revolutionary and
proletarian movement confronts socialism as a reformist and bourgeois
movement. And the new communism is not just a new edition of the theory
of radical social democracy. As a result of the world crisis, it has
gained new depth, which totally differentiates it from the old theory.
In what follows, we shall elucidate the differences between the two
theories.

## 2. Class Struggle and Socialization

During its best days, social democracy established as its principle the
class struggle against the bourgeoisie, and as its goal, the realization
of socialism as soon as it could conquer political power. Now that
social democracy has abandoned that principle and that goal, both of
them have been taken up again by communism.

When the war broke out, social democracy abandoned the fight against the
bourgeoisie. Kautsky asserted that the class struggle was only
applicable to peacetime, while during wartime class solidarity against
the enemy nation must take its place. In support of this assertion he
pulled from out of his sleeve the lie of the "defensive war", with which
the masses were deceived at the start of hostilities. The leaders of the
SPD majority and the Independents differed on this point only because
the former collaborated enthusiastically with the war policy of the
bourgeoisie while the latter patiently endured it, because they did not
dare to lead the struggle themselves. After the defeat of German
militarism in November 1918, the same pattern was repeated. The social
democratic leaders joined the government alongside the bourgeois parties
and tried to persuade the workers that this constituted the political
power of the proletariat. But they did not use their power over the
Councils and government ministries to realize socialism, but to
reestablish capitalism. Besides this, one must add that the colossal
power of Capital, which is the principle enemy and exploiter of the
proletariat, is now embodied in Entente Capital, which now rules the
world. The German bourgeoisie, reduced to impotence, can only exist as a
peon and agent of Entente imperialism and is responsible for crushing
the German workers and exploiting them on behalf of Entente Capital. The
social democrats, as the political representatives of this bourgeoisie,
and who now form the German government, have the task of carrying out
the orders of the Entente and requesting its aid and support.

For their part, the Independents, who during the war restrained the
workers in their struggle against the powerful German imperialism, have
seen that after the war their task consists -- with, for example, their
praise for the League of Nations and Wilson and their propaganda in
favor of the Versailles Peace Treaty -- in restraining the workers in
their struggle against the arrogance of world capitalism.

In the previous period, when social democracy denounced and opposed war,
the good faith of its leaders could have been taken for granted, and one
could have also thought that their elevation to the highest posts in the
government would have signified the political power of the proletariat,
since, as representatives of the workers, they had framed legislation
for the realization of, or at least the first steps towards socialism.
But every worker knows that -- despite the occasional proclamation --
they now have nothing at all to do with such things. Is it agreed that
these gentlemen, once they have satisfied the aims of their greed, have
no other desires or goals; that the social democracy was therefore
nothing to them but a lot of hot air? Perhaps to some degree. But there
are also other more important reasons which explain their behavior.

The social democracy has said that, in the current circumstances, after
the terrible economic collapse, it is no longer by any means possible to
realize socialism. And here we find an important distinction between the
positions of communism and social democracy. The social democrats say
that socialism is only possible in a society of abundance, of increasing
prosperity. The communists say that in such periods capitalism is most
secure, because then the masses do not think about revolution. The
social democrats say: first, production must be reestablished, to avoid
a total catastrophe and to keep the masses from dying of hunger. The
communists say: now, when the economy has hit rock bottom, is the
perfect time to reestablish it upon socialist foundations. The social
democrats say that even the most basic recovery of production requires
the continuation of the old capitalist mode of production, in
conformance with which all institutions are structured and thanks to
which a devastating class struggle against the bourgeoisie will be
avoided. The communists say: a recovery of the capitalist economic
foundations is completely impossible; the world is sinking ever deeper
into bankruptcy before our eyes, into a degree of poverty which makes a
break with the bourgeoisie necessary, as the bourgeoisie is blocking the
only possible road to reconstruction. So the social democrats want to
first reestablish capitalism, avoiding the class struggle; the
communists want to build socialism from scratch right now, with the
class struggle as their guide.

What, then, is this all about? The social labor process is the
production of all the goods needed for life. But the satisfaction of
human needs is not the goal of capitalist production; its goal is
surplus value, profit. All capitalist activities are directed towards
profit, and only for that purpose are the workers allowed to work in
their factories to manufacture goods in their countries, goods which are
required to satisfy our needs. Now, this whole labor process is
paralyzed and destroyed. Profits, of course, are still being made, even
enormous profits, but this is taking place via the tortuous detours of
capital flight, parasitism, plunder, the black market and speculation.
If the regular source of profit is to be reestablished for the
bourgeoisie, then production, the labor process, must be restarted. Is
this possible?

Insofar as it is a question of labor, of production, this cannot be so
difficult. The working class masses are there, ready to work. As for
food, enough is produced in Germany. As for raw materials, such as coal
and iron, these are in relatively short supply in comparison to the
great mass of highly-skilled industrial workers; but this could easily
be compensated for, thanks to trade with the less industrialized, but
raw materials-rich countries of Eastern Europe. Thus, the recovery of
production does not pose a superhuman problem. But capitalist production
means that part of the product goes to the capitalist without the
capitalist having to work for it.

The bourgeois legal order is the means which makes it possible for these
capitalists to reap this profit as if it were a natural process, thanks
to its property rights. By means of these rights, capital has "claims"
to its profit. The same thing happened before the war. But the war has
enormously increased the profit claims of capital. The State debt today
is numbered almost in the billions, whereas before the war it was just
in the millions. This means that the owners of those titles to public
State debt expect to receive, without working, all their billions in
interest payments from the labor of the whole population, in the form of
taxes. Furthermore, in Germany's case one must add to this sum the war
indemnities owed to the Entente, which add up to a total sum of 200 or
300 billion, more than half the gross national product. This means that,
out of the total sum of production, more than half must be paid to the
capitalists of the Entente on account of war indemnities. Besides this,
there is the German bourgeoisie itself, which wants to extract the
greatest possible profit in order to accumulate new capital. So, what
will be left for the workers? The worker, in spite of all of this, needs
to live; but it is clear that under these circumstances his upkeep will
be reduced to a minimum, while all of capital's profits can only be
produced thanks to more intensive labor, a longer working day and more
refined methods of exploitation.

Capitalist production now implies such a high degree of exploitation
that it will make life intolerable and almost impossible for the
workers. The reestablishment of production is not in itself so very
difficult; it requires capable and determined organization, as well as
the enthusiastic collaboration of the entire proletariat. But the
reestablishment of production under such tremendous pressure and under
conditions of such systematic exploitation, which only gives the workers
the minimum needed to sustain life, is practically impossible. The first
attempt to implement such a policy must fail due to the resistance and
the refusal of the workers themselves, on the part of those whom it
would dispossess of any prospects of meeting their essential life-needs,
leading to the gradual destruction of the whole economy. Germany
provides an example of such a scenario.

Already during the war the communists recognized the impossibility of
paying the enormous war debt and its interest, and put forth the demand
that the war debts and indemnities should be cancelled. But that is not
all. Should the private debts incurred during the war also be cancelled?
There is little difference between capital which has been borrowed
during the war to build artillery pieces and the stock issues of a
factory making armor or artillery shells. In this case one cannot
distinguish between the various kinds of capital, nor can one admit the
claims of one kind to its profit while rejecting the others. All profits
constitute for capital a claim on production, which hinders
reconstruction. For an economy in such a precarious situation, the
tremendous burden of the costs of the war is not the only weight it must
bear; all its other claimants must also be entered on the scales. This
is why communism, which as a matter of principle rejects all capital's
claims to profit, is the only practically feasible principle. The
economy must be practically rebuilt from scratch, without any regard for
capital's profit.

The rejection of capital's right to profit was always, however, an axiom
of social democracy as well. How does social democracy approach this
problem now? It is fighting for "socialization", that is, for the
expropriation of industry by the State, and the indemnification of the
industrialists. This means that, once more -- and this time even through
the mediation of the State -- part of the product of labor must be paid
to these capitalists for not working. In this way, the exploitation of
the workers by capital remains the same as before. Two things were
always essential characteristics of socialism: the elimination of
exploitation and the social regulation of production. The first is the
most important goal for the proletariat; the second is the most rational
method for increasing production, by way of its technical organization.
But in the "socialization" plans being prepared by social democracy
exploitation continues to exist, and the de-privatization of industry
only leads to State capitalism (or State socialism), which turns the
capitalist owners into shareholders of the State. The "socialization"
currently sought by the social democrats is therefore a lie for the
proletariat, to whom only the external facade of socialism is displayed,
while in fact exploitation is kept alive. The foundation of this
position is undoubtedly the fear of a harsh conflict with the
bourgeoisie, at a time when the proletariat is growing more confident,
but is still not in possession of all the forces required for the
revolutionary struggle. In practice, however, what this really amounts
to is an attempt to put capitalism back on its feet, upon new
foundations. Naturally, this attempt must fail, since the impoverished
economy cannot afford such gifts to capital.

The social democrats of both tendencies, then, maintain the exploitation
of the workers by capital; one policy leaves capitalism to its own
development, the other stimulates and regulates this exploitation
through the intermediary of the State. Both, for the worker, have just
this one solution: Work, work, work hard, with all your strength!
Because the reconstruction of the capitalist economy is only possible if
the proletariat exerts itself to satisfy the demands of the most extreme
degree of exploitation.

## 3. Mass Action and Revolution

Even before the war the difference between social democracy and
communism was already evident, although not under that name. This
difference involved the tactics of the struggle. Under the name of "left
radicals", an opposition arose at that time within social democracy
(from which the predecessors of today's communists emerged), which
defended mass action against the "radicals" and the revisionists. In
this dispute it became clear that the radical spokesmen, especially
Kautsky, defended a position opposed to revolutionary action, both
theoretically as well as tactically.

The parliamentary and trade union struggle had brought the workers -- in
a vigorously expanding capitalism -- some economic improvements, while
simultaneously building a powerful barrier against capitalism's
permanent tendencies towards pauperization of the working class. Over
the last decade, however, this barrier slowly gave way, in spite of the
workers' strong and expanding organization: imperialism reinforced the
power of the capitalists and militarism, weakened parliament, put the
trade unions on the defensive and began to prepare for the world war. It
was clear that the old methods of struggle no longer worked. The masses
were instinctively aware of this; in every country they participated in
actions which were often opposed by their leaders, launched large-scale
trade union struggles, carried out transport strikes which paralyzed the
economy, or took part in political demonstrations. The outbreak of
proletarian revolt frequently erupted in such a way as to shatter the
self-confidence of the bourgeoisie, which was compelled to make
concessions; or the movements were often enough quenched by means of
massacres.

The social democratic leaders also tried to use these actions for their
own political objectives; they acknowledged the usefulness of political
strikes for particular goals, but only on condition that they be reduced
to pre-arranged limits, on condition that they begin and end when the
leaders give the order, and that they always remain subordinated to the
tactics determined by the leaders. Thus, it often happens that such
strikes take place today, too, but usually without too much success. The
tempestuous violence of the elemental uprising of the masses is
paralyzed by a policy of compromise.

The element of class action that immediately creates panic in the ruling
bourgeoisie -- the fear that the workers' movement might take on a
revolutionary character -- disappeared from these "disciplined" mass
actions, since every precaution had been taken to ensure their
harmlessness.

The revolutionary Marxists -- today's communists -- then made an
assessment of the limited character of the ideology of the social
democratic leadership. They saw that, throughout history, the masses,
the classes themselves, had been the motor force of and the impulse
behind every action. Revolutions never arose from the prudent decisions
of recognized leaders. When the circumstances and the situation became
intolerable, the masses suddenly rose, overthrew the old authorities,
and the new class or a fraction of that class took power and molded the
State or society in accordance with its needs. It was only during the
last 50 years of peaceful capitalist development that the illusion
emerged and flourished that leaders, as individual subjects, direct the
course of history in accordance with their enlightened intelligence.
Parliamentarians and the staff attached to the State executive offices
believe that their deeds, actions and decisions determine the course of
events; the masses who follow them must only take action when they are
called upon to do so, ratifying the words of their spokesmen and then
quickly disappearing from the political stage. The masses have to play a
simple passive role, that of choosing their leaders, and it is the
latter that provide the decisive impulse to the course of development.

But if this belief is inadequate for the understanding of the past
revolutions of history, it is yet more inadequate for understanding the
present situation, in the light of the profound difference between the
bourgeois revolution and the proletarian revolution. In the bourgeois
revolution, the popular masses of workers and petit bourgeoisie only
rise once (as in Paris in February of 1848), or intermittently, as in
the great French Revolution, in order to overthrow the old royalty or a
new power which has gotten out of control such as that of the Girondins.
Once their work was done they gave way to new men, the representatives
of the bourgeoisie, who formed a new government, and proceeded to
reconfigure and reconstruct the State institutions, the constitution and
the laws. The power of the proletarian masses was needed to destroy the
old regime, but not to construct the new one, because the new regime was
the organization of a new class power.

It was in accordance with this model that the radical social democrats
conceived the proletarian revolution, which -- unlike the reformists --
they believed to be necessary. A great popular uprising must put an end
to the old military-absolutist rule and bring the social democrats to
power, who would take care of everything else, building socialism by
means of new legislation. This is how they conceive of the proletarian
revolution. But the proletarian revolution is something completely
different. The proletarian revolution is the liberation of the masses
from all class power and all exploitation. This means that they must
themselves take history into their own hands, in order to make
themselves masters of their own labor. Starting with the old human
species, limited to slave labor, which only thinks of itself and sees no
further than the walls of its factory, they must create new men, proud,
ready to fight, with an independent spirit, suffused with solidarity,
not allowing themselves to be deceived by the clever lies of bourgeois
theories, regulating the labor process on their own. This change cannot
take place as a result of a single revolutionary act, but will require a
long process, in which the workers, through necessity and bitter
disillusionments, occasional victories and repeated defeats, slowly
build up the necessary force to attain the cohesive unity and the
maturity for freedom and power. This process of struggle is the
proletarian revolution.

How long this process will take will vary from country to country and
according to the particular circumstances, and will depend above all on
the power of resistance of each ruling class. The fact that it took a
relatively short period of time in Russia was due to the fact that the
bourgeoisie there was weak and that, thanks to the latter's alliance
with the landed nobility, the peasants were impelled to take the side of
the workers. The bourgeoisie's axis of power is the violence of the
State, the violent organization of force with all the means at its
disposal: law, school, police, judiciary, army and bureaucracy, which
hold in their hands the control over all sectors of public life. The
revolution is the struggle of the proletariat against this power
apparatus of the ruling class; the proletariat can only win its freedom
if it opposes the organization of the enemy with a stronger and more
cohesive organization of its own. The bourgeoisie and State power try to
keep the workers impotent, dispersed and intimidated, in order to
interrupt the growth of their unity through violence and lies, and to
demoralize them concerning the power of their own actions. Against these
efforts, mass action arises from the ranks of the workers' multitudes,
action leading to the paralysis and breakdown of State organizations. As
long as the latter remain intact, the proletariat is not victorious,
because those organizations will constantly operate against the
proletariat. Therefore, its struggle -- if the world does not want to
come to an end in capitalism -- must finally do away with the State
machinery, which must be destroyed and rendered harmless by the powerful
actions of the proletariat.

Kautsky had already opposed this conception before the war. According to
him, the proletariat must not adopt this tactic, which would lead it to
destroy the State in an outburst of violence, since it would need the
State apparatus for its own purposes. All the ministries of the existing
State, once in the power of the proletariat, will continue to be
necessary in order to implement the laws passed on behalf of the
workers. The goal of the proletariat must not be the destruction of the
State, but its conquest. The question of how to create the organization
of the power of the victorious proletariat -- whether it will be a
continuation of the bourgeois State, as Kautsky believed, or a
completely new organization -- is thus posed. But the social democratic
theories, as they have been formulated and propagandized by Kautsky over
the last thirty years, only spoke of economics and capitalism, from
which socialism would have to "necessarily" emerge; "how" all of this is
to happen was never elaborated and thus the question of the relation
between the State and revolution was not addressed at the time. It was
to find its answer only later. In any event, the opposition between the
social democratic and communist theories was already clear in regard to
the question of revolution.

For the social democrats, the proletarian revolution is a single act, a
popular movement that destroys the old power and puts the social
democrats in the driver's seat of the State, in the government posts.
The downfall of the Hohenzollerns in Germany on November 7, 1918 is in
their eyes a pure proletarian revolution, which only achieved victory
thanks to the special circumstance that the old compulsion was done away
with as a result of the war. For the communists, this revolt could only
signify the beginning of a proletarian revolution which, by overthrowing
the old compulsion, cleared the way for the workers to finish off the
old order and construct their class organization. As it turned out, the
workers allowed themselves to be led by social democracy and helped
rebuild the State's power after it had been paralyzed: they are still in
the midst of an epoch of difficult struggles.

For Kautsky and his friends, Germany is an authentic social democratic
republic where the workers, while not in power, at least collaborate in
the government -- Noske and his apparatus of repression are only
esthetic blemishes. They must not, of course, think that they have
arrived at socialism just yet. Kautsky has constantly repeated that,
according to the Marxist conception, the social revolution will not take
place all at once, but is a long historical process: capitalism is not
yet mature enough for the economic revolution. By this he means to say,
among other things, that, although the proletarian revolution has taken
place, the proletarians must allow themselves to be exploited as before
and a few big industries must only slowly be nationalized. Or, to put it
in plain English: instead of the old ministers, the social democrats
have occupied the highest positions in the State; but capitalism is
still the same along with its exploitation.

This is the practical meaning of the social democratic claim, according
to which, after a proletarian revolutionary uprising, struck at one
blow, a much longer process of socialization and of social revolution
must be undertaken. Against this conception, communism asserts that the
proletarian revolution, the seizure of power by the proletariat, is a
very slow process of mass struggle, through which the proletariat will
rise to power and isolate the State machinery. At the apex of this
struggle, when the workers take power, exploitation will be quickly
ended, the suppression of all claims to profit without labor will be
proclaimed, and the first steps towards the new juridical basis for the
reconstruction of the economy as a consciously-organized, goal-driven
mechanism will be taken.

## 4. Democracy and Parliamentarism

Social democratic doctrine never concerned itself with the problem of
discovering the political forms its power would assume after having
reached its goal. The beginning of the proletarian revolution has
provided the practical answer to this question, thanks to the events
themselves. This practice of the first stages of the revolution has
enormously increased our ability to understand the essence and the
future path of the revolution; it has enormously clarified our
intuitions and contributed new perspectives on a matter which was
previously vaguely outlined in a distant haze. These new intuitions
constitute the most important difference between social democracy and
communism. If communism, in the points discussed above, signifies
faithfulness to and the correct extension of the best social democratic
theories, now, thanks to its new perspectives, it rises above the old
theories of socialism. In this theory of communism, Marxism undergoes an
important extension and enrichment.

Up until now, only a few people were aware of the fact that radical
social democracy had become so profoundly estranged from Marx's views in
its concept of the State and revolution -- which, furthermore, no one
had even taken the trouble to discuss. Among the few exceptions, Lenin
stands out. Only the victory of the Bolsheviks in 1917, and their
dissolution of the National Assembly shortly afterwards, showed the
socialists of Western Europe that a new principle was making its debut
in Russia. And in Lenin's book, _The State and Revolution_, which was
written in the summer of 1917 -- although it only became available in
Western Europe in the following year -- one finds the foundations of the
socialist theory of the State considered in the light of Marx's views.

The opposition between social democracy and the socialism we are now
considering is often expressed in the slogan, "Democracy or
Dictatorship". But the communists also consider their system to be a
form of democracy. When the social democrats speak of democracy, they
are referring to democracy as it is applied in parliamentarism; the
communists oppose parliamentary or bourgeois democracy. What do they
mean by these terms?

Democracy means popular government, people's self-government. The
popular masses themselves must administer their own affairs and
determine them. Is this actually the case? The whole world knows the
answer is no. The State apparatus rules and regulates everything; it
governs the people, who are its subjects. In reality, the State
apparatus is composed of the mass of officials and military personnel.
Of course, in relation to all matters which affect the entire community,
officials are necessary for carrying out administrative functions; but
in our State, the servants of the people have become their masters.
Social democracy is of the opinion that parliamentary democracy, due to
the fact that it is the form of democracy where the people elect their
government, is in a position -- if the right people are elected -- to
make popular self-government a reality.

What really happens is clearly demonstrated by the experience of the new
German republic. There can be no doubt that the masses of workers do not
want to see the return of a triumphant capitalism. Even so, while in the
elections there was no limitation of democracy, there was no military
terrorism, and all the institutions of the reaction were powerless,
despite all this the result was the reestablishment of the old
oppression and exploitation, the preservation of capitalism. The
communists had already warned of this and foresaw that, by way of
parliamentary democracy, the liberation of the workers from their
exploitation by capital would not be possible.

The popular masses express their power in elections. On election day,
the masses are sovereign; they can impose their will by electing their
representatives. On this one day, they are the masters. But woe to them
if they do not choose the right representatives! During the entire term
after the election, they are powerless. Once elected, the deputies and
parliamentarians can decide everything. This democracy is not a
government of the people themselves, but a government of
parliamentarians, who are almost totally independent of the masses. To
make them more responsive to a greater extent one could make proposals,
such as, for example, holding new elections every year, or, even more
radical, the right of recall (compulsory new elections at the request of
a certain number of the eligible voters); naturally, however, no one is
making such proposals. Of course, the parliamentarians cannot do just as
they please, since four years later they will have to run for office
again. But during that time they manipulate the masses, accustoming them
to such general formulas and such demagogic phrases, in such a way that
the masses are rendered absolutely incapable of exercising any kind of
critical judgment. Do the voters, on election day, really choose
appropriate representatives, who will carry out in their name the
mandates for which they were elected? No; they only choose from among
various persons previously selected by the political parties who have
been made familiar to them in the party newspapers.

But let us assume that a large number of people are elected by the
masses as the representatives of their true intentions and are sent to
parliament. They meet there, but soon realize that the parliament does
not govern; it only has the mission of passing the laws, but does not
implement them. In the bourgeois State there is a separation of powers
between making and executing the laws. The parliament possesses only the
first power, while it is the second power which is really determinate;
the real power, that of implementing the laws, is in the hands of the
bureaucracy and the departments of the State, at whose summit is the
government executive as the highest authority. This means that, in the
democratic countries, the government personnel, the ministers, are
designated by the parliamentary majority. In reality, however, they are
not elected, they are nominated, behind closed doors with a lot of
skullduggery and wheeling and dealing, by the leaders of the parties
with a parliamentary majority. Even if there were to be an aspect of
popular will manifested in the parliament, this would still not hold
true in the government.

In the personnel staffing the government offices, the popular will is to
be found only -- and there, in a weakened form mixed with other
influences -- alongside bureaucratism, which directly rules and
dominates the people. But even the ministers are almost powerless
against the organizations of the bureaucracy, who are nominally
subordinate to them. The bureaucracy pulls all the strings and does all
the work, not the ministers. It is the bureaucrats who remain in office
and are still there when the next batch of elected politicians arrives
in office. They rely on the ministers to defend them in parliament and
to authorize funding for them, but if the ministers cross them, they
will make life impossible for them.

This is the whole meaning of the social democratic concept of the
workers being able to take power and overthrow capitalism by means of
the normal rule of general suffrage. Do they really think they can make
anyone believe that all of these functionaries, office workers,
department administrators, confidential advisors, judges and officials
high and low, will be capable of carrying out any sort of change on
behalf of the freedom of the proletariat at the behest of the likes of
Ebert and Scheidemann, or Dittmann and Ledebour? The bureaucracy, at the
highest levels, belongs to the same class as the exploiters of the
workers, and in its middle layers as well as in its lowest ranks its
members all enjoy a secure and privileged position compared to the rest
of the population. This is why they feel solidarity with the ruling
layers which belong to the bourgeoisie, and are linked to them by a
thousand invisible ties of education, family relationships and personal
connections.

Perhaps the social democratic leaders have come to believe that, by
taking the place of the previous government ministers, they could pave
the way to socialism by passing new laws. In reality, however, nothing
has changed in the State apparatus and the system of power as a result
of this change of government personnel. And the fact that these
gentlemen do not want to admit that this is indeed the case is proven by
the fact that their only concern has been to occupy the government
posts, believing that, with this change of personnel, the revolution is
over. This is made equally clear by the fact that the modern
organizations created by the proletariat have, under their leadership, a
statist character and smell about them, like the State but on a smaller
scale: the former servants, now officials, have promoted themselves to
masters; they have created a dense bureaucracy, with its own interests,
which displays -- in an even more accentuated form -- the character of
the bourgeois parliaments at the commanding heights of their respective
parties and groups, which only express the impotence of the masses of
their memberships.

Are we therefore saying that the use of parliament and the struggle for
democracy is a false tactic of social democracy? We all know that, under
the rule of a powerful and still unchallenged capitalism, the
parliamentary struggle can be a means of arousing and awakening class
consciousness, and has indeed done so, and even Liebknecht used it that
way during the war. But it is for that very reason that the specific
character of democratic parliamentarism cannot be ignored. It has calmed
the combative spirit of the masses, it has inculcated them with the
false belief that they were in control of the situation and squelched
any thoughts of rebellion which may have arisen among them. It performed
invaluable services for capitalism, allowing it to develop peacefully
and without turmoil. Naturally, capitalism had to adopt the especially
harmful formula of deceit and demagogy in the parliamentary struggle, in
order to fulfill its aim of driving the population to insanity. And now
the parliamentary democracy is performing a yet greater service for
capitalism, as it is enrolling the workers' organizations in the effort
to save capitalism.

Capitalism has been quite considerably weakened, materially and morally,
during the world war, and will only be able to survive if the workers
themselves once again help it to get back on its feet. The social
democratic labor leaders are elected as government ministers, because
only the authority inherited from their party and the mirage of the
promise of socialism could keep the workers pacified, until the old
State order could be sufficiently reinforced. This is the role and the
purpose of democracy, of parliamentary democracy, in this period in
which it is not a question of the advent of socialism, but of its
prevention. Democracy cannot free the workers, it can only plunge them
deeper into slavery, diverting their attention from the genuine path to
freedom; it does not facilitate but blocks the revolution, reinforcing
the bourgeoisie's capacity for resistance and making the struggle for
socialism a more difficult, costly and time-consuming task for the
proletariat.

## 5. Proletarian Democracy, or the Council System

Social democracy believed that the conquest of political power by the
proletariat had to take the form of a seizure of the power of the State
apparatus by the workers' party. This was why socialism had to leave the
State apparatus intact, to place it at the service of the working class.
Marxists, including Kautsky, also shared this belief.

Marx and Engels viewed the State as the violent machinery of oppression
created by the ruling class and then perfected and further developed
during the 19th century as the proletariat's revolt grew stronger. Marx
thought that the task of the proletariat consisted in the destruction of
this State apparatus and the creation of completely new administrative
organs. He was well aware of the fact that the State exercises many
functions which, at first sight, benefit the general interest -- public
safety, the regulation of trade, education, administration -- but he
also knew that all of these activities were subordinated to the
overriding goal of securing the interests of capital, of assuring its
power. This is why he never succumbed to the fantasy that this machinery
of repression could ever become an organ of popular liberation, while
preserving its other functions. The proletariat must provide itself with
its own instrument of liberation.

It seemed that this instrument could not be identified prior to its
actual appearance; only practice could unveil it. This became possible
for the first time in the Paris Commune of 1871, when the proletariat
conquered State power. In the Commune, the citizens and workers of Paris
elected a parliament after the old model, but this parliament was
immediately transformed into something quite unlike our parliament. Its
purpose was not to entertain the people with fine words while allowing a
small clique of businessmen and capitalists to preserve their private
property; the men who met in the new parliament had to publicly regulate
and administer everything on behalf of the people. What had been a
parliamentary corporation was transformed into a corporation of labor;
it formed committees which were responsible for framing new legislation.
In this manner, the bureaucracy as a special class, independent of and
ruling over the people, disappeared, thereby abolishing the separation
of legislative and executive powers. Those persons who occupied the
highest posts over the people were at the same time elected by and
representatives of the people themselves who put them in office, and
could at any time be removed from office by their electors.

The short life of the Paris Commune did not permit a complete
development of this new concept; it arose, so to speak, instinctively,
within the feverish struggle for existence. It was Marx's brilliant
perspicacity that caused it to be recognized as the embryonic form of
the future forms of the State power of the proletariat. A new and
important step was taken in 1905 in Russia, with the establishment of
councils, or soviets, as organs of expression of the fighting
proletariat. These organs did not conquer political power, although the
Saint Petersburg central workers' council assumed the leadership of the
struggle, and exercised considerable power. When the new revolution
broke out in 1917, the soviets were once again constructed, this time as
organs of proletarian power. With the German November Revolution the
proletariat took political control of the country and provided the
second historical example of proletarian State power. It was in the
Russian example, however, that the political forms and principles the
proletariat needs to achieve socialism were most clearly presented.
These are the principles of communism as opposed to those of social
democracy.

The first principle is that of the dictatorship of the proletariat. Marx
repeatedly maintained that the proletariat, immediately after taking
power, must establish its dictatorship. By dictatorship he meant
workers' power to the exclusion of the other classes. This assertion
provoked many protests: justice prohibits such a dictatorship, which
privileges certain groups above others which are denied their rights,
and instead requires democracy and equality before the law for everyone.
But this is not at all the case: each class understands justice and
rights to mean what is good or bad for it; the exploiter complains of
injustice when he is put to work. In other times, when the proud
aristocrat or the rich and arrogant bourgeois scornfully looked down
with repugnance upon the idea of political equality and political rights
for the slaves who toiled in the worst, most downtrodden and degrading
jobs, in those times it was a sign full of meaning for the honor of the
men who were beginning to rebel, when in their status as proletarians
they rose up against the status quo and said: we have the same rights as
you.

The democratic principle was the first display of the emergence of the
class consciousness of the working class, which did not yet dare to say:
I was nothing, but I want to be everything. If the community of all the
workers wants to rule and make all the decisions about public affairs,
and to be responsible for everything, then will I have to hear about
"natural" or heaven-sent rights from all the criminals, thieves,
pickpockets, all those who eat at the expense of their fellow men, the
war profiteers, black market speculators, landowners, moneylenders,
rentiers, all those who live off the labor of others without doing any
work themselves? If it is true that each person has a natural right to
participate in politics, it is no less true that the whole world has a
natural right to live and not to die from hunger. And, if to assure the
latter, the former must be curtailed, then no one should feel that their
democratic sensibilities have been violated.

Communism is not based on any particular abstract right, but on the
needs of the social order. The proletariat has the task of organizing
social production in a socialist manner and regulating labor in a new
way. But then it clashes with the powerful resistance of the ruling
class. The latter will do everything within its power to prevent or
impede the advent of the new order: this is why the ruling class must be
excluded from exercising any political influence whatsoever. If one
class wants to go forward, and the other wants to go backward, the car
will not leave the station; any attempt at cooperation will bring
society to a standstill. During the first phase of capitalism, when it
needed to fortify its position as a newly-risen class, the bourgeoisie
built its dictatorship upon the foundation of property qualifications
for voter eligibility. Later it was compelled to change to democracy,
granting the appearance of equal rights to the workers, which pacified
them; but this democratic form did not affect the authentic class
dictatorship of the bourgeoisie, but only disguised it, even if it gave
the growing proletariat the opportunity to assemble and to recognize its
class interests.

After the initial victory of the proletariat, the bourgeoisie retained
many means of power, of both a material and a spiritual nature, at its
disposal, which will obviously be employed in an effort to impede the
progress of the new order, and may be able to paralyze it, if full
political freedom is conceded to the bourgeoisie. It will therefore be
necessary to shackle this class with the strongest measures of
compulsion, and to mercilessly punish, as a grave crime against the
vital interests of the people, any attempt to restrain or to impede the
new organization of the economy.

It may seem that the exclusion of a particular class always has
something of the unjust and arbitrary about it. From the point of view
of the parliamentary system, this may be so. But, given the special
organization of the proletarian State, the council system automatically,
so to speak, causes all exploiters and parasites to be self-excluded
from participation in the regulation of society.

The council system constitutes the second principle of the communist
order. In the council system, political organization is built upon the
economic process of labor. Parliamentarism rests upon the individual in
his quality as a citizen of the State. This had its historical
justification, since bourgeois society was originally composed of
producers who were equal in respect to one another, each one of whom
produced his commodities himself and together formed, through the sum of
all their little transactions, the production process as a whole. But in
modern society, with its giant industrial complexes and its class
antagonisms, this basis is becoming increasingly obsolete. From this
point of view, the theoreticians of French syndicalism (Lagardelle, for
example) were correct in their harsh critique of parliamentarism.
Parliamentary theory views each man primarily as a citizen of the State,
and as such, individuals thereby come to be abstract entities, all of
them equal. But in practice, the real, concrete man is a worker. His
activity is the practical content of his life, and the activities of all
men together form the social labor process as a whole.

It is neither the State nor politics, but society and labor, which
constitute the great living community of man. In order to unite men in
groups, parliamentary political practice divides the State into
electoral districts; but the men who are assigned to these districts,
workers, landlords, street peddlers, manufacturers, landowners, members
of every class and every trade, haphazardly lumped together due to the
purely accidental fact of their place of residence, can by no means
arrive at a communitarian representation of their common interest and
will, because they have nothing in common. The natural groups are
production groups, the workers of a factory, who take part in the same
activity, the peasants in a village, and, on a larger scale, the
classes.

It is of course true that certain political parties recruit people
principally from certain classes, whom they represent, although
incompletely. Belonging to a party is primarily a matter of political
convictions rather than one's class: a large part of the proletariat has
always sought its political representatives from other parties besides
social democracy.

The new society makes labor and its organization the conscious focus and
foundation of all political life, where "political" refers to the
outward arrangement of economic life. Under capitalism, this is
expressed in an occult fashion, but in the future society it will take
on an open and evident expression. People themselves act directly within
their work groups. The workers in a factory elect one of their comrades
as a representative of their will, who remains in continual contact with
them, and can at any time be replaced by another. The delegates are
responsible for decisions concerning everything within their competence
and hold meetings whose composition varies according to whether the
agenda is about matters relating to a particular profession, or a
particular district, and so forth. It is from among these delegates that
the central directive bodies arise in each area.

Within such institutions there is no room for any kind of representation
for the bourgeoisie; whoever does not work as a member of a production
group is automatically barred from the possibility of being part of the
decision-making process, without needing to be excluded by formal voting
arrangements. On the other hand, the former bourgeois who collaborates
in the new society according to his abilities, as the manager of a
factory, for example, can make his voice heard in the factory assemblies
and will have the same decision-making power as any other worker. The
professions concerned with general cultural functions such as teachers
or doctors, form their own councils, which make decisions in their
respective fields of education and health in conjunction with the
representatives of the workers in these fields, which are thus managed
and regulated by all. In every domain of society, the means employed is
self-management and organization from below, to mobilize all the forces
of the people for the great objective; at the summit, these forces of
the people are joined together in a central governing body, which
guarantees their proper utilization.

The council system is a state organization without the bureaucracy of
permanent officials which makes the State an alien power separate from
the people. The council system realizes Friedrich Engels' assertion that
government over people will give way to administration over things.
Official posts (which are always necessary for administration) which are
not especially crucial will be accessible to anyone who has undergone an
elementary training program. The higher administration is in the hands
of elected delegates, subject to immediate recall, who are paid the same
wage as a worker. It could happen that during the transition period this
principle may not be totally and consistently implemented, since the
necessary abilities will not be found in every delegate all the time;
but when the bourgeois press deliberately goes to grotesque lengths in
its praise for the abilities of today's bureaucratic system, it is worth
recalling the fact that, in November 1918, the workers and soldiers
councils successfully carried out formidable tasks before which the
State and military bureaucracies quailed.

Since the councils combine the tasks of management and execution, and
since the delegates themselves must carry out the decisions they make,
there is no place for bureaucrats or career politicians, both of which
are denizens of the institutions of bourgeois State power. The goal of
every political party, that is, of every organization of professional
politicians, is to be able to take the State machinery into its hands;
this goal is foreign to the Communist Party. The purpose of the latter
is not the conquest of power for itself, but to show the goal and the
way forward to the fighting proletariat, by means of the dissemination
of communist principles, towards the end of establishing the system of
workers' councils.

On this point, finally, social democracy and communism are opposed with
respect to their immediate practical aims: the first seeks the
reorganization of the old bourgeois State; the second, a new political
system.
