---
title: Commodity Fetishism
author: Perlman, Fredy
date: 1968
description: "Written as an introduction to the translation of I. I. Rubin\'s \"Essays on Marx\'s Theory of Value\". Based on a text form [the Anarchist Library](https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/fredy-perlman-commodity-fetishism-an-introduction-to-i-i-rubin-s-essay-on-marx-s-theory-of-valu), with minor correction based on the _Black Rose Book_ version (1990). An alternative version can be found on [libcom.org](https://libcom.org/library/commodity-fetishism-fredy-perlman). The book itself can be found [here](https://www.marxists.org/archive/rubin/value/index.htm)."
keywords: Political Economy
...

According to economists whose theories currently prevail in America,
economics has replaced political economy, and economics deals with
scarcity, prices, and resource allocation. In the definition of Paul
Samuelson, "economics or political economy, as it used to be called, is
the study of how men and society _choose_, with or without the use of
money, to employ _scarce_ productive resources, which could have
alternative uses, to produce various commodities over time and
distribute them for consumption, now and in the future, among various
people and groups in society."[^1] According to Robert Campbell, "One of
the central preoccupations of economics has always been what determines
price."[^2] In the words of another expert, "Any community, the primers
tell us, has to deal with a pervasive economic problem: how to determine
the uses of available resources, including not only goods and services
that can be employed productively but also other scarce supplies."[^3]

If economics is indeed merely a new name for political economy, and if
the subject matter which was once covered under the heading of political
economy is now covered by economics, then economics has replaced
political economy. However, if the subject matter of political economy
is not the same as that of economics, then the "replacement" of
political economy is actually an omission of a field of knowledge. If
economics answers different questions from those raised by political
economy, and if the omitted questions refer to the form and the quality
of human life within the dominant social-economic system, then this
omission can be called a "great evasion"[^4].

The Soviet economic theorist and historian I.I. Rubin suggested a
definition of political economy which has nothing in common with the
definitions of economics quoted above. According to Rubin, "Political
economy deals with human working activity, not from the standpoint of
its technical methods and instruments of labor, but from the standpoint
of its social form. It deals with production relations which are
established among people in the process of production."[^5]In terms of
this definition, political economy is not the study of prices or of
scarce resources; it is a study of social relations, a study of culture.
Political economy asks why the productive forces of society develop
within a particular social form, why the machine process unfolds within
the context of business enterprise, why industrialization takes the form
of capitalist development. Political economy asks how the working
activity of people is regulated in a specific, historical form of
economy.

The contemporary American definitions of economics quoted earlier
clearly deal with different problems, raise different questions, and
refer to a different subject matter from that of political economy as
defined by Rubin. This means one of two things:

(a) either economics and political economy are two different branches of
knowledge, in which case the "replacement" of political economy by economics
simply means that the American practitioners of one branch have replaced the
other branch, or
(b) economics is indeed the new name for what "used to be called" political
economy; in this case, by defining economics as a study of scarcity, prices, and
resource allocation, American economists are saying that the production
relations among people are not a legitimate subject for study. In this case the
economists quoted above are setting themselves up as the legislators over what
is, and what is not, a legitimate topic for intellectual concern; they are
defining the limits of American knowledge. This type of intellectual legislation
has led to predictable consequences in other societies and at other times: it
has led to total ignorance in the excluded field of knowledge, and it has led to
large gaps and blind spots in related fields of knowledge.

A justification for the omission of political economy from American
knowledge has been given by Samuelson. In the balanced, objective
language of an American professor, Samuelson says: "A billion people,
one-third of the world's population, blindly regard *Das Kapital* as
economic gospel. And yet, without the disciplined study of economic
science, how can anyone form a reasoned opinion about the merits or lack
of merits in the classical, traditional economics?"[^6]If "a billion
people" regard *Das Kapital* "as economic gospel" it is clearly relevant
to ask why only a few million Americans regard Samuelson's *Economics*
"as economic gospel". Perhaps a balanced objective answer might be that
"a billion people" find little that is relevant or meaningful in
Samuelson's celebrations of American capitalism and his exercises in
two-dimensional geometry, whereas the few million Americans have no
choice but to learn the "merits in the classical, traditional
economics". Samuelson's rhetorical question -- "And yet, without the
disciplined study of economic science, how can anyone form a reasoned
opinion about the merits" -- is clearly a two-edged sword, since it can
be asked about any major economic theory, not merely Samuelson's: and it
clearly behooves the student to draw his own conclusion and make his own
choice after a "disciplined study" of all the major economic theories,
not merely Samuelson's.

Although Samuelson, in his introductory textbook, devotes a great deal
of attention to Marx, this essay will show that Samuelson's treatment
hardly amounts to a "disciplined study" of Marx's political economy.

The present essay will outline some of the central themes of Marx's
political economy, particularly the themes which are treated in Rubin's
*Essays on Marx's Theory of Value*. Rubin's book is a comprehensive,
tightly argued exposition of the core of Marx's work, the theory of
commodity fetishism and the theory of value. Rubin clarifies
misconceptions which have resulted, and still result, from superficial
readings and evasive treatments of Marx's work.

Marx's principal aim was not to study scarcity, or to explain price, or
to allocate resources, but to analyze how the working activity of people
is regulated in a capitalist economy. The subject of the analysis is a
determined social structure, a particular culture, namely
commodity-capitalism, a social form of economy in which the relations
among people are not regulated directly, but through things.
Consequently, "the specific character of economic theory as a science
which deals with the commodity capitalist economy lies precisely in the
fact that it deals with production relations which acquire material
forms." (Rubin, p. 47).

Marx's central concern was human creative activity, particularly the
determinants, the regulators which shape this activity in the capitalist
form of economy. Rubin's thorough study makes it clear that this was not
merely the central concern of the "young Marx" or of the "old Marx", but
that it remained central to Marx in all his theoretical and historical
works, which extend over half a century. Rubin shows that this theme
gives the unity of a single work to fifty years of research and writing,
that this theme is the content of the labor theory of value, and thus
that Marx's economic theory can be understood only within the framework
of this central theme. Marx's vast *opus* is not a series of
disconnected episodes, each with specific problems which are later
abandoned. Consequently, the frequently drawn contrast between an
"idealistic young Marx" concerned with the philosophical problems of
human existence, and a "realistic old Marx" concerned with technical
economic problems,[^7]is superficial and misses the essential unity of
Marx's entire *opus*. Rubin shows that the central themes of the "young
Marx" were being still further refined in the final pages of Marx's last
published work; Marx continually sharpened his concepts and frequently
changed his terminology, but his concerns were not replaced. Rubin
demonstrates this by tracing the central themes of works which Marx
wrote in the early 1840's through the third volume of *Capital*,
published by Engels in 1894.

In the different periods of his productive life, Marx expressed his
concern with human creativity through different, though related,
concepts. In his early works, Marx unified his ideas around the concept
of "alienation" or "estrangement". Later, when Marx refined his ideas of
"reified" or "congealed" labor, the theory of commodity fetishism
provided a focus, a unifying framework for his analysis. In Marx's later
work, the theory of commodity fetishism, namely the theory of a society
in which relations among people take the form of relations among things,
the theory of a society in which production relations are reified,
becomes Marx's "general theory of production relations of the
commodity-capitalist economy". (Rubin, p. 3). Thus Marx's theory of
value, the most frequently criticized part of his political economy, can
only be understood within the context of the theory of commodity
fetishism, or in Rubin's words, the "ground of Marx's theory of value
can only be given on the basis of his theory of commodity fetishism,
which analyzes the general structure of the commodity economy". (p. 61)

This essay will examine the relationship between the concept of
alienation, the theory of commodity fetishism and the theory of value,
and it will be shown that the three formulations are approaches to the
same problem: the determination of the creative activity of people in
the capitalist form of economy. This examination will show that Marx had
no interest per se in defining a standard of value, in developing a
theory of price isolated from a historically specific mode of
production, or in the efficient allocation of resources. Marx's work is
a critical analysis of how people are regulated in the capitalist
economy; it is not a handbook on how to regulate people and things. The
subtitle of Marx's three volume *Capital* is "Critique of Political
Economy", and not "Manual for Efficient Management". This does not mean
that Marx did not consider problems of resource allocation important; it
means that he did not consider them the central concern of political
economy, a science of social relations.

Marx's first approach to the analysis of social relations in capitalist
society was through the concept of alienation, or estrangement. Although
he adopted the concept from Hegel, already in his earliest works Marx
was critical of the content which Hegel gave to the concept. "For Hegel
the *essence of man -- man -- equals self-consciousness*. All
estrangement of the human essence is therefore *nothing but estrangement
of self-consciousness*."[^8] For Marx in 1844, Hegel's treatment of
consciousness as man's essence is "a hidden and mystifying criticism",
but Marx observes that "inasmuch as it grasps steadily man's
estrangement, even though man appears only in the shape of mind, there
lie concealed in it all the elements of criticism, already prepared and
elaborated in a manner often rising far above the Hegelian
standpoint."[^9] Thus Marx adopts the concept of "estrangement" as a
powerful tool for analysis, even though he does not agree with Hegel
about what is estranged, namely he does not agree that thinking is the
essence of man. For Marx in 1844, man's essence is larger than thought,
larger than self-consciousness; it is man's creative activity, his
labor, in all its aspects. Marx considers consciousness to be only one
aspect of man's creative activity. Thus, while he concedes that Hegel
"grasps labor as the essence of man," he points out that "The only labor
which Hegel knows and recognizes is *abstractly mental* labor"[^10]. But
Hegel does not only define self-consciousness as man's essence; he then
proceeds to accommodate himself to alienated, externalized modes of
consciousness, namely to religion, philosophy and state power; Hegel
"confirms this in its alienated shape and passes it off as his true mode
of being reestablishes it, and pretends to be at home in his other-being
as such. Thus, for instance, after annulling and superseding religion,
after recognizing religion to be a product of self-alienation, he yet
finds confirmation of himself in religion as religion. Here is the root
of Hegel's false positivism, or of his merely *apparent*
criticism."[^11] However for Marx "There can therefore no longer be any
question about an act of accommodation" and he explains, "If I know
religion as alienated human self-consciousness, then what I know in it
as religion is not my self-consciousness, but my alienated
self-consciousness..."[^12] In other words, even though Hegel
formulated the concept of alienation, he was yet able to accommodate
himself to religion and state power, namely to alienated forms of
existence which negate man's essence even in Hegel's definition (as
consciousness).

Thus Marx set himself two tasks: to reshape the concept of alienation,
and to redefine man's essence. For this purpose Marx turned to
Feuerbach, who completed the first task for him, and who went a long way
in providing a provisional solution to the second. The solution to both
tasks could be approached if practical, creative activity and the
working relations of people with each other, were made the center, the
focal point of theory. Only then would it be possible to see that
religion, and philosophy as well, are not forms of realization but
rather forms of alienation of man's essence. Marx acknowledged his debt:
"Feuerbach's great achievement is: (1) The proof that philosophy is
nothing else but religion rendered into thought and expounded by
thought, hence equally to be condemned as another form and manner of
existence of the estrangement of the essence of man; (2) The
establishment of true materialism and of real science, since Feuerbach
also makes the social relationship 'of man to man' the basic principle
of the theory..."[^13]

Marx acknowledged Feuerbach's role in reshaping the concept of
alienation, namely in grasping religion and philosophy as alienations of
the essence of man. However, a year later, in his *Theses on Feuerbach*
of 1845, Marx expresses dissatisfaction with Feuerbach's grasp of the
human essence. "Feuerbach resolves the essence of religion into the
essence of man", but for Feuerbach the essence of man remains something
isolated, unhistorical, and therefore abstract. For Marx, "the essence
of man is not an abstraction inherent in each particular individual. The
real nature of man is the totality of social relations."[^14] Marx
generalizes his dissatisfaction with Feuerbach: "The chief defect of all
previous materialism (including that of Feuerbach) is that things,
reality, the sensible world, are conceived only in the form of *objects
of observation*, but not as *human sense activity*, not as *practical
activity*..."[^15] Marx makes this charge more specific in a later
work, where he says that Feuerbach "still remains in the realm of theory
and conceives of men not in their given social connection, not under
their existing conditions of life, which have made them what they are",
and therefore "he never arrives at the really existing active men, but
stops at the abstraction 'man'... he knows no other 'human
relationships' 'of man to man' than love and friendship, and even then
idealized. Thus he never manages to conceive the sensuous world as the
total living sensuous activity of the individuals composing it."[^16]

Marx is able to reject Feuerbach's definition of man as an abstraction
because, already in an early essay on "Free Human Production", Marx had
started to view man in far more concrete terms, namely he had already
started to view the world of objects as a world of practical human
activity, creative activity. In this early essay, written in 1844,
Marx's conception of man is still unhistorical; he did not explicitly
reject this unhistorical view until he wrote *The German Ideology* with
Engels in 1845--46 and the *Poverty of Philosophy* in 1847. However,
this early essay already brings human creative activity into focus, and
thus it also points to the "essence" which is alienated in capitalist
society. Marx asks the reader to imagine human beings outside of
capitalist society, namely outside of history: "Suppose we had produced
things as human beings: in his production each of us would have twice
affirmed himself and the other. (1) In my production I would have
objectified my individuality and its particularity, and in the course of
the activity I would have enjoyed an individual life; in viewing the
object I would have experienced the individual joy of knowing my
personality as an objective, sensuously perceptible, and indubitable
power. (2) In your satisfaction and your use of my product I would have
had the direct and conscious satisfaction that my work satisfied a human
need, that it objectified human nature, and that it created an object
appropriate to the need of another human being... Our productions
would be so many mirrors reflecting our nature... My labor would be a
*free manifestation of life* and an *enjoyment of life*."[^17] It is
precisely this labor, this free production, this free manifestation and
enjoyment of life, which is alienated in capitalist society: "Under the
presupposition of private property my labor is an *externalization of
life* because I *work in order to live* and provide for myself the means
of living. Working is not living." At this point Marx vividly contrasts
the idea of free, unalienated labor, with the alienated wage-labor --
he calls it forced labor -- of capitalist society: "Under the
presupposition of private property my individuality is externalized to
the point where I hate this activity and where it is a torment for me.
Rather it is then only the semblance of an activity, only a forced
activity, imposed upon me only by external and accidental necessity and
not by an internal and determined necessity... My labor, therefore, is
manifested as the objective, sensuous, perceptible, and indubitable
expression of my self-loss and my powerlessness."[^18]

Thus Marx is led to a contrast between an unalienated, ideal,
unhistorical man, and the alienated man of capitalist society. From
here, we might follow Rubin and show the relationship of this contrast
between the ideal and the actual to the later contrast between
productive forces and relations of production. The later contrast
becomes the basis for Marx's theory of commodity fetishism, and thus for
his theory of value. However, before returning to Rubin's exposition, we
will digress slightly to examine two types of interpretation which have
recently been made of Marx's early works. One holds that Marx's theory
of alienation can be accepted and applied without his critique of
capitalism, and the other holds that the writings of 1844 contain the
quintessence of Marx's thought and that the later works are merely
reformulations of the same insights.

The sociologist Robert Blauner reduces alienation to "a quality of
personal experience which results from specific kinds of social
arrangements."[^19] On the basis of this reduction Blauner says that
"Today, most social scientists would say that alienation is not a
consequence of capitalism per se but of employment in the large-scale
organizations and impersonal bureaucracies that pervade all industrial
societies."[^20]In other words, Blauner defines alienation as a
psychological, personal experience, as something which the worker feels,
and which is consequently in the mind of the worker and is not a
structural feature of capitalist society. For Blauner to say that
alienation so defined "is not a consequence of capitalism" is then a
tautology. It is Blauner's very definition which makes it possible for
him to treat alienation as a consequence of industry (namely the
productive forces) and not as a consequence of capitalism (namely the
social relations).

However, regardless of what "most social scientists would say," in
Marx's work alienation is related to the structure of capitalist
society, and not to the personal experience of the worker. It is the
very nature of wage-labor, the basic social relation of capitalist
society, which accounts for alienation: "The following elements are
contained in wage-labor: (1) the chance relationship and alienation of
labor from the laboring subject; (2) the chance relationship and
alienation of labor from its object; (3) the determination of the
laborer through social needs which are an alien compulsion to him, a
compulsion to which he submits out of egoistic need and distress these
social needs are merely a source of providing the necessities of life
for him, just as he is merely a slave for them; (4) the maintenance of
his individual existence appears to the worker as the goal of his
activity and his real action is only a means; he lives to acquire the
means of living."[^21]In fact, Marx very explicitly located alienation
at the very root of capitalist society: "To say that man alienates
himself is the same as saying that the society of this alienated man is
the caricature of his actual common life, of his true generic life. His
activity, therefore, appears as torment, his own creation as a force
alien to him, his wealth as poverty, the essential bond connecting him
with other men as something unessential so that the separation from
other men appears as his true existence." Marx adds that this capitalist
society, this caricature of a human community, is the only form of
society which capitalist economists are able to imagine: "Society, says
Adam Smith, is a commercial enterprise. Each of its members is a
merchant. It is evident that political economy establishes an alienated
form of social intercourse as the essential, original, and definitive
human form."[^22]

In the *Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844*, Marx applies
Feuerbach's concept of man's alienation of himself in religion, to man's
alienation of himself in the product of his labor. The following passage
comes very close to describing the world of commodities as a world of
fetishes which regulate and dominate human life: "The more the worker
expends himself in his work, the more powerful becomes the world of
objects which he creates in face of himself, and the poorer he himself
becomes in his inner life, the less he belongs to himself. It is just
the same as in religion. The more of himself man attributes to God, the
less he has left in himself. The worker puts his life into the object,
and his life then belongs no longer to him but to the object. The
greater his activity, therefore, the less he possesses... The
alienation of the worker in his product means not only that his labour
becomes an object, takes on its own existence, but that it exists
outside him, independently and alien to him, and that it stands opposed
to him as an autonomous power. The life which he has given to the object
sets itself against him as an alien and hostile force."[^23] In the same
work, Marx comes very close to defining the product of labor as
congealed labor, or reified labor, a formulation which is to reappear
more than twenty years later in his theory of commodity fetishism: "The
object produced by labour, its product, now stands opposed to it as an
*alien being*, as a power independent of the producer. The product of
labour is labour which has been embodied in an object, and turned into a
physical thing; this product is an *objectification* of labour." The
labor which is lost by the worker is appropriated by the capitalist:
"...the alienated character of work for the worker appears in the fact
that it is not his work but work for someone else, that in work he does
not belong to himself but to another person."[^24] The result of this
alienation of the worker's creative power is vividly described by Marx
in a passage that summarizes the qualitative aspect of his theory of
exploitation: "The less you are, the less you express your own life, the
greater is your alienated life, the more you have, the greater is the
store of your estranged being. Everything which the political economist
takes from you in life and in humanity, he replaces for you in money and
in wealth..."[^25] The producer alienates his creative power, in fact
he sells it to the capitalist, and what he gets in exchange is different
in kind from that creative power; in exchange for the creative power he
gets things, and the less he is, as a creative human being, the more
things he has.

These formulations make it clear that, for Marx, alienation is inherent
in the social relations of capitalist society, a society in which one
class appropriates the labor which another class alienates; for Marx,
wage-labor is, by definition, alienated labor. In terms of this
definition of alienated labor, the statement that "alienation is not a
consequence of capitalism" is meaningless.

The Yugoslav philosopher Veljko Korac has presented the theory of
alienation formulated by Marx in 1844 as the final form of Marx's theory
and Korac summarized this theory as follows: "Establishing through
critical analysis man's alienation from man, from the product of his
labor, even from his own human activity, Marx raised the question of
abolishing all these forms of dehumanization, and the possibility of
restoring human society."[^26]In 1844 Marx did indeed speak of
"rehabilitating" (if not exactly of "restoring") "human society":
"Communism... is hence the actual phase necessary for the next stage
of historical development in the process of human emancipation and
rehabilitation. Communism is the necessary pattern and the dynamic
principle of the immediate future, but communism as such is not the goal
of human development -- which goal is the structure of human
society."[^27]In some passages of the *Economic and Philosophic
Manuscripts*, Marx even spoke of communism as a return of human nature:
"Communism is the positive abolition of private property, of human
self-alienation, and thus, the real appropriation of human nature,
through and for man. It is therefore the return of man himself as a
social, that is, really human, being, a complete and conscious return
which assimilates all the wealth of previous development. Communism as a
complete naturalism is humanism, and as a complete humanism is
naturalism... The positive abolition of private property, as the
appropriation of human life, is thus the positive abolition of all
alienation, and thus the return of man from religion, the family, the
State, etc., to his human, i.e., social life."[^28]In 1844, Marx had
also defined the agent, the social class, which would carry through this
reappropriation of man's creative power, this return of man's human
essence; it would be "a class with radical chains, a class in civil
society that is not of civil society, a class that is the dissolution of
all classes, a sphere of society having a universal character because of
its universal suffering and claiming no particular right because no
particular wrong but unqualified wrong is perpetrated on it; a sphere
that can invoke no traditional title but only a human title..."[^29]
Marx even described some of the social relations of an unalienated,
human society: "Assume man to be man and his relationship to the world
to be a human one: then you can exchange love only for love, trust for
trust, etc. If you want to enjoy art, you must be an artistically
cultivated person..."[^30].

Thus there is no doubt that in 1844, Marx spoke of a human society and a
human essence which could be rehabilitated, returned, or restored.
However, powerful and suggestive though these passages are, they cannot
be viewed as the final formulation of Marx's social and economic theory,
nor can Marx's later works be treated as mere re-statements of the same
ideas. Erich Fromm is aware of this when he writes: "In his earlier
writings Marx still called 'human nature in general' the 'essence of
man.' He later gave up this term because he wanted to make it clear that
the essence of man is no abstraction... Marx also wanted to avoid
giving the impression that he thought of the essence of man as an
unhistorical substance."[^31] Fromm is also aware that Marx's concept of
alienation, "although not the word, remains of central significance
throughout his whole later main work, including *The Capital*."[^32]
Fromm does not, however, examine the stages which led from the concept
of alienation to the theory of commodity fetishism, and in Fromm's own
philosophical framework, the central problem is "to cease being asleep
and to become human". For Fromm this involves primarily changing one's
ideas and one's methods of thinking: "I believe that one of the most
disastrous mistakes in individual and social life consists in being
caught in stereotyped alternatives of thinking... I believe that man
must get rid of illusions that enslave and paralyze him, that he must
become aware of the reality inside and outside of him in order to create
a world which needs no illusions. Freedom and independence can be
achieved only when the chains of illusion are broken."[^33]

In the Preface to *The German Ideology*, Marx ridicules would-be
revolutionaries who want to free men from stereotyped alternatives of
thinking, from the illusions that enslave and paralyze men. Marx has
these revolutionaries announce: "Let us liberate them from the chimeras,
the ideas, dogmas, imaginary beings under the yoke of which they are
pining away. Let us revolt against the rule of thoughts. Let us teach
men, says one, to exchange these Imaginations for thoughts which
correspond to the essence of man; says the second, to take up a critical
attitude to them; says the third, to knock them out of their heads; and
existing reality will collapse." Then Marx draws the ridicule to its
conclusion: "Once upon a time a valiant fellow had the idea that men
were drowned in water only because they were possessed with the idea of
gravity. If they were to knock this notion out of their heads, say by
stating it to be a superstition, a religious concept, they would be
sublimely proof against any danger from water."[^34]In a letter written
at the end of 1846, Marx turned the same critique against P. J. Proudhon:
"... in place of the practical and violent action of the masses...
Monsieur Proudhon supplies the whimsical motion of his own head. So it
is the men of learning that make history, the men who know how to
purloin God's secret thoughts. The common people have only to apply
their revelations. You will now understand why M. Proudhon is the
declared enemy of every political movement. The solution of present
problems does not lie for him in public action but in the dialectical
rotations of his own mind."[^35]

Between 1845 and 1847, Marx also abandons his earlier conception of a
human essence or a human nature to which man can return: "As individuals
express their life, so they are. What they are, therefore, coincides
with their production, both with what they produce and with how they
produce. The nature of individuals thus depends on the material
conditions determining their production."[^36]In fact, Marx goes on to
say that man's ideas of his nature or his essence are themselves
conditioned by the material conditions in which men find themselves, and
therefore man's "essence" is not something to which he can return, or
even something which he can conceive in thought, since it is constantly
in a process of historical change. "Men are the producers of their
conceptions, ideas, etc. real, active men, as they are conditioned by a
definite development of their productive forces and of the intercourse
corresponding to these... Consciousness can never be anything else
than conscious existence, and the existence of men is their actual-life
process." Consequently, "we do not set out from what men say, imagine,
conceive, nor from men as narrated, thought of, imagined, conceived, in
order to arrive at men in the flesh. We set out from real, active men,
and on the basis of their real life-process we demonstrate the
development of the ideological reflexes and echoes of this
life-process."[^37]Thus unlike the philosopher we quoted earlier, Marx
no longer begins his analysis with "Marx's concept of Man"; he begins
with man in a given cultural environment. Marx systematized the
relationship between technology, social relations and ideas in *The
Poverty of Philosophy* in 1847: "In acquiring new productive forces men
change their mode of production, and in changing their mode of
production... they change all their social relations. The handmill
gives you society with the feudal lord; the steammill, society with the
industrial capitalist. The same men who establish their social relations
in conformity with their material productivity, produce also principles,
ideas and categories, in conformity with their social
relations."[^38]The next step is to pull man's "essence" into history,
namely to say that man has no essence apart from his historical
existence, and this is precisely what Marx does when he says that the
"sum of productive forces, capital funds and social forms of
intercourse, which every individual and generation finds in existence as
something given, is the real of what the philosophers have conceived as
'substance' and 'essence of man'..." [^39]

Here Marx's contrast between an ideal, unalienated society, and the real
capitalist society, has come to an end. Man creates the material
conditions in which he lives, not in terms of an ideal society which he
can "restore", but in terms of the possibilities and the limits of the
productive forces which he inherits. Marx defines these historical
limits and possibilities in the letter from which we quoted earlier:
"... men are not free to choose their productive forces -- which are
the basis of all their history -- for every productive force is an
acquired force, the product of former activity. The productive forces
are therefore the result of practical human energy; but this energy is
itself conditioned by the circumstances in which men find themselves, by
the productive forces already acquired, by the social form which exists
before they, which they do not create, which is the product of the
preceding generation. Because of this... a history of humanity takes
shape which is all the more a history of humanity as the productive
forces of man and therefore his social relations have been more
developed."[^40]"... People won freedom for themselves each time to the
extent that was dictated and permitted not by their ideal of man, but by
the existing productive forces."[^41]

Marx has resolved man's essence into the historical conditions in which
man exists, and thus he has been led to abandon the conflict between the
alienated man of capitalist society and his unalienated human essence.
However, Rubin points out that over a decade later, in 1859, the
conflict reappears on a new plane, no longer in the form of a conflict
between ideal and reality, but as a conflict between productive forces
and social relations which are both parts of reality: "At a certain
stage of their development, the material forces of production in society
come into conflict with the existing relations of production... From
forms of development of the forces of production these relations turn
into their fetters. Then comes the period of social revolution."[^42]

Having pointed to the relations of production, namely the social
relations among people in the process of production, as the framework
within which man's productive forces, his technology, develop, and as
fetters which may obstruct the further development of technology, Marx
now turns to a detailed characterization of the relations of production
of capitalist society. And having abandoned the study of man's essence
for the study of man's historical situation, Marx also abandons the word
"alienation", since the earlier use of the word has made it an
abbreviated expression for "man's alienation from his essence". Already
in *The German Ideology*, Marx had referred sarcastically to the word
"estrangement" (or alienation) as "a term which will be comprehensible
to the philosophers",[^43] implying that it was no longer an acceptable
term to Marx. However, even though he abandons the word, Marx continues
to develop the content which he had expressed with the word, and this
further development takes Marx far beyond his early formulations, and
just as far beyond the theorists who think the concept of alienation was
fully developed and completed in the *Economic and Philosophical
Manuscripts of 1844*. Rubin shows that this further development of the
concept of alienation takes place precisely in the theory of commodity
fetishism and the theory of value, and so I will now turn to Rubin's
exposition of these theories and will attempt to make explicit their
connections with the concept of alienation[^44].

Rubin outlines Marx's transition from the concept of alienation to the
theory of commodity fetishism in the following terms: "In order to
transfer the theory of 'alienation' of human relations into a theory of
'reification' of social relations (i.e., into the theory of commodity
fetishism), Marx had to create a path from utopian to scientific
socialism, from negating reality in the name of an ideal to seeking
within reality itself the forces for further development and motion."
(Rubin, p. 57). The link between alienation and commodity fetishism is
the concept of 'reification' (materialization objectification) of social
relations. Rubin traces certain stages in Marx's formulation of the
concept of reification. In the *Contribution to the Critique of
Political Economy* of 1859, Marx noted that in capitalist society, where
labor creates commodities, "the social relations of men appear in the
reversed form -a social relation of things."[^45] In this work, social
relations among people merely "appear" to take the form of things, they
merely seem to be reified. Consequently, Marx calls this reification a
"mystification", and he attributes to "the habit of everyday life"[^46].

However, in Volume I of Capital, this reification of social relations is
no longer merely an appearance in the mind of the individual commodity
producer and it is no longer a result of the commodity producer's
thinking habits. Here, "the materialization of production relations does
not arise from 'habits' but from the internal structure of the commodity
economy. Fetishism is not only a phenomenon of social consciousness, but
of social being." (Rubin, p. 59). The cause of the fetishism, namely the
cause of the fact that relations among people take the form of relations
among things, is to be found in the characteristics of capitalist
economy as a commodity economy: "The absence of direct regulation of the
social process of production necessarily leads to the indirect
regulation of the production process through the market, through the
products of labor, through things." (Ibid.)

Consequently, the reification of social relations and the fetishism of
commodities are not "chains of illusion" which can be "broken" within
the context of capitalist society, because they do not arise from
"stereotyped alternatives of thinking" (Erich Fromm). The capitalist
form of social production "necessarily leads" to the reification of
social relations; reification is not only a "consequence" of capitalism;
it is an inseparable aspect of capitalism. Concrete, unalienated labor
which is a creative expression of an individual's personality, cannot
take place within the production process of capitalist society. The
labor which produces commodities, namely things for sale on the market,
is not concrete but abstract labor, "abstractly-general, social labor
which arises from the complete alienation of individual labor" (Rubin,
p. 147). In the commodity economy labor is not creative activity; it is
the expenditure of labor-time, of labor-power, of homogeneous human
labor, or labor in general. Nor is this the case at all times and in all
places. "Only on the basis of commodity production, characterized by a
wide development of exchange, a mass transfer of individuals from one
activity to another, and indifference of individuals towards the
concrete form of labor, is it possible to develop the homogeneous
character of all working operations as forms of human labor in general"
(Rubin, p. 138). In capitalist society, this labor-power which produces
commodities is itself a commodity: it is a thing which is bought by the
capitalist from the worker, or as Paul Samuelson puts it: "A man is much
more than a commodity. Yet it is true that men do rent out their
services for a price."[^47] Thus labor in capitalist society is reified
labor; it is labor turned into a thing.

The reified labor of capitalist society, the abstract, homogeneous
labor-power which is bought by the capitalist for a price, is
crystallized, congealed in commodities which are appropriated by the
capitalist and sold on the market. The laborer literally alienates,
estranges his creative power, he sells it. Since creative power refers
to an individual's conscious participation in the shaping of his
material environment, since the power to decide is at the root of
creation, it would be more accurate to say that creative power simply
does not exist for the hired worker in capitalist society. It is
precisely the power to shape his circumstances that the laborer sells to
the capitalist; it is precisely this power which is appropriated by the
capitalist, not only in the form of the homogeneous labor-time which he
buys for a price, but also in the form of the abstract labor which is
congealed in commodities. This reified labor, this abstract labor which
is crystallized, congealed in commodities, "acquires a given social
form" in capitalist society, namely the form of' value. Thus Marx "makes
the 'form of value' the subject of his examination, namely value as the
social form of the product of labor -- the form which the classical
economists took for granted..."(Rubin, p. 112). Thus, through the
theory of commodity fetishism, the concept of reified labor becomes the
link between the theory of alienation in the *Economic and Philosophic
Manuscripts of 1844* and the theory of value in *Capital*.

Marx's explanation of the phenomenon of reification, namely of the fact
that abstract labor takes the "form of value", is no longer in terms of
people's habits, but in terms of the characteristics of a commodity
economy. In *Capital*, Marx points out that relations among people are
realized through things, and that this is the only way they can be
realized in a commodity economy: "The social connection between the
working activity of individual commodity producers is realized only
through the equalization of all concrete forms of labor, and this
equalization is carried out in the form of an equalization of all the
products of labor as values" (Rubin, p. 130). This is not only true of
relations among capitalists as buyers and sellers of the products of
labor, but also of relations between capitalists and workers as buyers
and sellers of labor-power. It is to be noted that in the commodity
economy, the laborer himself is a "free, independent" commodity
producer. The commodity he produces is his labor-power; he produces this
commodity by eating, sleeping and procreating. In David Ricardo's
language, the "natural price of labour" is that price which enables
laborers "to subsist and perpetuate their race",[^48]namely to reproduce
their labor-power. The worker sells his commodity on the labor market in
the form of value, and in exchange for a given amount of his commodity,
labor-power, he receives a given sum of value, namely money, which he in
turn exchanges for another sum of value, namely consumer goods.

It is to be noted that the laborer does not exchange creative power for
creative power. When the worker sells his labor-power as abstract labor
in the form of value, he totally alienates his creative power. When the
capitalist buys a given quantity of the worker's labor-power, say eight
hours of labor-power, he does not appropriate merely a part of that
quantity, say four hours, in the form of surplus labor; the capitalist
appropriates all eight hours of the worker's labor-power. This
labor-power then crystallizes, congeals in a given quantity of
commodities which the capitalist sells on the market, which he exchanges
as values for equivalent sums of money. And what the laborer gets back
for his alienated labor-power is a sum of money which is "equivalent in
value" to the labor-power. This relation of exchange of "equivalent
values", namely the exchange of a given number of hours of labor-power
for a given sum of money, conceals a quantitative as well as a
qualitative aspect of exploitation. The quantitative aspect was treated
by Marx in his theory of exploitation, developed in Volume I of
*Capital*. The amount which the capitalist receives in exchange for the
commodities he sells on the market is larger than the amount which he
spends for the production of the commodities, which means that the
capitalist appropriates a surplus in the form of profit. The qualitative
aspect was treated by Marx in his theory of alienation, and further
developed in the theory of commodity fetishism. The two terms of the
equivalence relation are not equivalent qualities; they are different in
kind. What the worker receives in exchange for his alienated creative
power is an "equivalent" only in a commodity economy, where man's
creative power is reduced to a marketable commodity and sold as a value.
In exchange for his creative power the worker receives a wage or a
salary, namely a sum of money, and in exchange for this money he can
purchase products of labor, but he cannot purchase creative power. In
other words, in exchange for his creative power the laborer gets things.
Thus when Marx speaks of the capitalist's appropriation of "surplus
value" or "surplus labor", he refers to the quantitative aspect of
exploitation, not the qualitative aspect. Qualitatively, the laborer
alienates the entirety of his creative power, his power to participate
consciously in shaping his material environment with the productive
forces he inherits from previous technological development. This means
that "it is true that men do rent out their services for a price"
(Samuelson), and as a result, "The less you *are*, the less you express
your own life, the greater is your *alienated* life, the more you *have*
..."[^49]

In a commodity economy, people relate to each other only through, and by
means of, the exchange of things; the relation of purchase and sale is
"the basic relation of commodity society" (Rubin, p. 15). Production
relations among people are established through the exchange of things
because "permanent, direct relations between determined persons who are
owners of different factors of productions, do not exist. The
capitalist, the wage laborer, as well as the landowner, are commodity
owners who are formally independent from each other. Direct production
relations among them have yet to be established, and then in a form
which is usual for commodity owners, namely in the form of purchase and
sale" (Rubin, p. 18; italics in original). It is on the basis of these
reified social relations, namely on the basis of production relations
which are realized through the exchange of things, that the process of
production is carried out in the capitalist society, because the
"production relations which are established among the representatives of
the different social classes (the capitalist, worker and landlord),
result in a given combination of technical factors of production
..."(Rubin, p. 19). Thus it is through, and by means of, these reified
social relations that productive forces, namely technology, are
developed in capitalist society.

The capitalist's appropriation of the alienated creative power of
society takes the form of an appropriation of things, the form of
accumulation of capital. And it is precisely this accumulation of
capital that defines the capitalist as a capitalist: "The capitalist's
status in production is determined by his ownership of capital, of means
of production, of things..."(Rubin, p. 19). Thus in Volume III of
*Capital*, Marx says that "the capitalist is merely capital personified
and functions in the process of production solely as the agent of
capital"[^50]and thus Rubin speaks of the "personification of things"
(Rubin, Chapter 3). The capital gives the capitalist the power to buy
equipment and raw materials, to buy labor-power, to engage the material
and human agents in a productive activity which results in a given sum
of commodities. In this process, the capital "pumps a definite quantity
of surplus-labour out of the direct producers, or labourers; capital
obtains this surplus-labour without an equivalent, and in essence it
always remains forced labour -- no matter how much it may seem to
result from free contractual agreement."[^51]In capitalist society a man
without capital does not have the power to establish these relations.
Thus, superficially, it seems that capital, a thing, possesses the power
to hire labor, to buy equipment, to combine the labor and the equipment
in a productive process, to yield profit and interest, "it seems that
the thing itself possesses the ability, the virtue, to establish
production relations." (Rubin, p. 21). In the words of the official
American textbook, "Wages are the return to labor; interest the return
to capital; rent the return to land."[^52] Marx called this the Trinity
Formula of capitalism: "In the formula: capital -- interest, land
-ground-rent, labour -- wages, capital, land and labour appear
respectively as sources of interest (instead of profit), ground-rent and
wages, as their products, or fruits, the former are the basis, the
latter the consequence, the former are the cause, the latter the effect;
and indeed, in such a manner that each individual source is related to
its product as to that which is ejected and produced by it."[^53]Capital
is a thing which has the power to yield interest, land is a thing which
has the power to yield rent, labor is a thing which has the power to
yield wages, and money "transforms fidelity into infidelity, love into
hate, hate into love, virtue into vice, vice into virtue, servant into
master, master into servant, idiocy into intelligence, and intelligence
into idiocy ",[^54]or as American banks advertise, "money works for
you." Rubin states that "vulgar economists... assign the power to
increase the productivity of labor which is inherent in the means of
production and represents their technical function, to capital, i.e., a
specific social form of production (theory of productivity of capital)"
(Rubin, p. 28), and the economist who represents the post-World War II
consensus of the American economics profession writes in 1967 that
"capital has a net productivity (or real interest yield) that can be
expressed in the form of a percentage per annum..."[^55]

A thing which possesses such powers is a fetish, and the fetish world
"is an enchanted, perverted, topsy-turvy world, in which Mister Capital
and Mistress Land carry on their goblin tricks as social characters and
at the same time as mere things."[^56] Marx had defined this phenomenon
in the first volume of *Capital*: "... a definite social relation
between men... assumes, in their eyes, the fantastic form of a
relation between things. In order, therefore, to find an analogy, we
must have recourse to the mist-enveloped regions of the religious world.
In that world the productions of the human brain appear as independent
beings endowed with life, and entering into relation both with one
another and the human race. So it is in the world of commodities with
the products of men's hands. This I call the Fetishism which attaches
itself to the products of labour, so soon as they are produced as
commodities, and which is therefore inseparable from the production of
commodities. This Fetishism of commodities has its origin... in the
peculiar social character of the labour that produces them."[^57] The
fetishist, systematically attributing to things the outcomes of social
relations, is led to bizarre conclusions: "What is profit the return to?
... the economist, after careful analysis, ends up relating the concept
of profit to dynamic innovation and uncertainty, and to the problems of
monopoly and incentives."[^58] Rubin points out that, "Instead of
considering technical and social phenomena as different aspects of human
working activity, aspects which are closely related but different,
vulgar economists put them on the same level, on the same scientific
plane so to speak... This identification of the process of production
with its social forms... cruelly revenges itself" (Rubin, p. 28), and
the economists are astonished to find that "what they have just thought
to have defined with great difficulty as a thing suddenly appears as a
social relation and then reappears to tease them again as a thing,
before they have barely managed to define it as a social relation."[^59]

The forces of production "alienated from labour and confronting it
independently"[^60]in the form of capital, give the capitalist power
over the rest of society. "The capitalist glows with the reflected light
of his capital" (Rubin, p. 25), and he is able to glow only because the
productive power of the workers has been crystallized in productive
forces and accumulated by the capitalist in the form of capital. The
capitalist, as possessor of capital, now confronts the rest of society
as the one at whose discretion production and consumption take place; he
confronts society as its ruler. This process is celebrated in the
official economics textbook: "Profits and high factor returns are the
bait; the carrots dangled before us enterprising donkeys. Losses are our
penalty kicks. Profits go to those who have been efficient in the past
-- efficient in making things, in selling things, in foreseeing things.
Through profits, society is giving the command over new ventures to
those who have piled up a record of success."[^61]

It can now be shown that the preceding sequence is a detailed
development, clarification, and concretization of the theory of
alienation which Marx had presented in 1844. This can be seen by
comparing the sequence with a passage cited earlier, written a quarter
of a century before the publication of the theory of commodity fetishism
in the first volume of *Capital*, and nearly half a century before the
third volume: "The object produced by labour, its product, now stands
opposed to it as an *alien being*, as a *power independent* of the
producer. The product of labour which has been embodied in an object,
and turned into a physical thing; this product is an *objectification*
of labour.... The alienation of the worker in his product means not
only that his labour becomes an object, takes on its own existence, but
that it exists outside him, independently, and alien to him, and that it
stands opposed to him as an autonomous power. The life which he has
given to the object sets itself against him as an alien and hostile
force."[^62] This passage seems, in retrospect, like a summary of the
theory of commodity fetishism. However, the definitions, the concepts,
the detailed relationships which the passage seems to summarize were
developed by Marx only decades later.

The next task is to examine Marx's theory of value within the context of
his theory of commodity fetishism, since, as Rubin points out, "The
theory of fetishism is, per se, the basis of Marx's entire economic
system, and in particular of his theory of value" (Rubin, p. 5). In this
context, Rubin distinguishes three aspects of value: it is "(I) a social
relation among people, (2) which assumes a material form and (3) is
related to the process of production" (Rubin, p. 63). The subject of the
theory of value is the working activity of people, or as Rubin defines
it: "The subject matter of the theory of value is the interrelations of
various forms of labor in the process of their distribution, which is
established through the relation of exchange among things, i.e.,
products of labor" (Rubin, p. 67). In other words, the subject of the
theory of value is labor as it is manifested in the commodity economy:
here labor does not take the form of conscious, creative participation
in the process of transforming the material environment; it takes the
form of abstract labor which is congealed in commodities and sold on the
market as value. "The specific character of the commodity economy
consists of the fact that the material-technical process of production
is not directly regulated by society but is directed by individual
commodity producers... The private labor of separate commodity
producers is connected with the labor of all other commodity producers
and becomes social labor only if the product of one producer is
equalized as a value with all other commodities" (Rubin, p. 70). Before
analyzing how labor is allocated through the equalization of things,
namely how human activity is regulated in capitalist society, Rubin
points out that the form which labor takes in capitalist society is the
form of value: "The reification of labor in value is the most important
conclusion of the theory of fetishism, which explains the inevitability
of 'reification' of production relations among people in a commodity
economy" (Rubin, p. 72). Thus the theory of value is about the regulation
of labor; it is this fact that most critics of the theory failed to
grasp. 

The question Marx raises is how the working activity of people is
regulated in capitalist society. His theory of value is offered as an
answer to this question. It will be shown that most critics do not offer
a different answer to the question Marx raises, they object to the
question. In other words, economists do not say that Marx gives
erroneous answers to the question he raises, but that he gives erroneous
answers to the questions they raise:

Marx asks: How is human working activity regulated in a capitalist
economy?

Marx answers: Human working activity is alienated by one class,
appropriated by another class, congealed in commodities, and sold on a
market in the form of value.

The economists answer: Marx is wrong. Market price is not determined by
labor; it is determined by the price of production and by demand. "The
great Alfred Marshall" insisted that "market price -- that is, economic
value -- was determined by both supply and demand, which interact with
one another in much the same way as Adam Smith described the operation
of competitive markets."[^63]

Marx was perfectly aware of the role of supply and demand in determining
market price, as will be shown below. The point is that Marx did not ask
what determines market price; he asked how working activity is
regulated.

The shift of the question began already in the 1870's, before the
publication of the second and third volumes of Marx's *Capital*. At that
time capitalist economists revived the utility theory of value of Jean
Baptiste Say and the supply-demand theory of price of Augustin
Cournot,[^64]both of which were developed in the early 19^th^ century.
The virtue of both approaches was that they told nothing about the
regulation of human working activity in capitalist society, and this
fact strongly recommended them to the professional economists of a
business society. The revival of Say and Cournot was hailed as a new
discovery, since the "new principle" drew a heavy curtain over the
questions Marx had raised. "The new principle was a simple one: the
value of a product or service is due not to the labor embodied in it but
to the usefulness of the last unit purchased. That, in essence, was the
principle of marginal utility", according to the historian Fusfeld[^65].
In the eyes of the American economist Robert Campbell, the reappearance
of the utility theory brought order into chaos: "The reconciliation of
all these conflicting partial explanations into a unified general theory
of value came only in the late nineteenth century with the concept of
general equilibrium and the reduction of all explanations to the common
denominator of utility by the writers of the utility school."[^66]
Fusfeld points out the main reason for the excitement: "One of the most
important conclusions drawn from this line of thinking was that a system
of free markets tended to maximize individual welfare."[^67] It was once
again possible to take for granted without questioning precisely what
Marx had questioned. After hailing the reappearance of the utility
theory, Campbell goes on to redefine economics in such a way as to
exclude the very questions Marx had raised. Campbell does this
explicitly: "One reflection of this new insight into the problem of
value was the formulation of a new definition of economics, the one
commonly used today, as the theory of allocation of scarce resources
among competing ends."[^68] Without mentioning that his own ideas about
value were extant at the time of Ricardo, the scientific economist
Campbell proceeds to dispose of Marx for retaining "ideas about value
extant at the time of Ricardo". Campbell then uses the restrained,
objective language of American social science to summarize Marx's life
work: "Marx took the theory of value as it then existed, and compounded
from some of its confusions a theory of the dynamics of the capitalist
system. (It might be more accurate to describe the process the other way
round: Marx had the conclusions and was trying to show how they flowed
rigorously and inevitably from the theory of value then generally
accepted. With the benefit of hindsight we may look back on his effort
as a *reductio ad absurdum* technique for proving the deficiencies of
Ricardian value theory.)" On the basis of this thorough analysis of
Marx's work, Campbell dispassionately concludes: "Thus the bondage of a
Marxist heritage in economic theory is not so much that the Marxist view
is simply wrong in one particular (i.e., that it assumes that value is
created only by labor) as that it does not comprehend the basic problem
of economic theory... it has not achieved a full understanding of what
a valid economic theory must illuminate. That achievement came in the
mainstream of world economic theorizing only after Marxism had already
taken the turning to enter the blind alley mentioned above."[^69] With
economics thus redefined and Marx disposed of, it becomes possible, once
again, to hold on to "a theory of value on the basis of analysis of the
act of exchange as such, isolated from a determined social-economic
context" (Rubin, pp. 85--86).

Thus economists did not replace Marx's answers to his questions with
more accurate answers; they threw out the questions, and replaced them
with questions about scarcity and market price; thus economists "shifted
the whole focus of economics away from the great issue of social classes
and their economic interests, which has been emphasized by Ricardo and
Marx, and centered economic theory upon the individual."[^70]Fusfeld
also explains why the economists shifted the focus: "The economists and
their highly abstract theories were part of the same social and
intellectual development that brought forth the legal theories of
Stephen Field and the folklore of the self-made man",[^71]i.e., the
economists are ideologically at one with the ruling class, the
capitalists, or as Samuelson put it, "Profits and high factor returns
are the bait, the carrots dangled before us enterprising donkeys."[^72]

Even theorists whose primary aim was not the celebration of capitalism
have interpreted Marx's theory of value as a theory of resource
allocation or a theory of price, and have underemphasized or even
totally overlooked the sociological and historical context of the
theory. This does not mean that problems of resource allocation or price
have nothing to do with a historical and sociological analysis of
capitalism, or that the elucidation of one aspect will necessarily add
nothing to the understanding of the others. The point here is that a
theory of resource allocation or a price theory need not explain why
human working activity is regulated through things in the capitalist
historical form of economy, since the theory of resource allocation or
the price theory can begin its analysis by taking capitalism for
granted. At the same time, a historical and sociological analysis of the
capitalist economy need not explain the allocation of resources or the
components of price in its attempt to characterize the form which human
working activity assumes in a given historical context. A price theorist
may concern himself explicitly with the social form of the economy whose
prices he examines, just as Marx did concern himself explicitly with
problems of price and allocation. But this does not mean that all price
theorists or resource allocators necessarily exhaust the sociological
and historical problems, or even that they have the slightest awareness
of capitalism as a specific historical form of economy, just as it does
not mean that Marx necessarily exhausted the problems of price
determination or resource allocation, even though he had far more
profound awareness of these problems than most of his superficial
critics, and even some of his superficial followers, give him credit
for.

Oskar binge pointed out that "leading writers of the Marxist school"
looked to Marx for a price theory, and consequently "they saw and solved
the problem only within the limits of the labor theory of value, being
thus subject to all the limitations of the classical theory."[^73] Yet
binge himself saw Marx's theory of value as an attempt to solve the
problem of resource allocation. According to binge, Marx "seems to have
thought of labor as the only kind of scarce resource to be distributed
between different uses and wanted to solve the problem by the labor
theory of value."[^74] It was rather Lange who devoted himself to
developing a theory of resource allocation, not Marx, and "the
unsatisfactory character of this solution"[^75] is clearly due to the
fact that Marx's theory was not presented as a solution to binge's
problems.

Fred Gottheil, in a recent book on Marx, explicitly reduces Marx's
theory of value to a theory of price. Unlike superficial critics of
Marx, Gottheil points out that Marx was aware that in capitalist society
prices are not determined by the "labor content" of commodities: "The
concept of price which is incorporated in the analysis of the Marxian
economic system is, without exception, the prices-of-production concept
... "[^76] However, by reducing Marx's theory of value to a price
theory, Gottheil pulls Marx's theory out of its sociological and
historical context (Gottheil does not even mention Marx's theory of
commodity fetishism). In this way Gottheil reduces Marx's historical and
sociological analysis of the commodity capitalist economy to a
mechanistic system from which Gottheil mechanically derives over 150
"predictions".

Joan Robinson knows that the construction of a theory of price was not
the primary aim of Marx's analysis, and says that Marx "felt obliged to
offer a theory of relative prices, but though he thought it essential we
can see that it is irrelevant to the main point of his argument."[^77]
However, Robinson seems to be unaware of just what "the point of the
argument" was: "The point of the argument was something quite different.
Accepting the dogma that all things exchange at prices proportional to
their values, Marx applies it to labour power. This is the clue that
explains capitalism. The worker receives his value, his cost in terms of
labour-time, and the employer makes use of him to produce more value
than he costs."[^78] Having reduced Marx's work to this "argument",
Robinson is able to conclude: "On this plane the whole argument appears
to be metaphysical, it provides a typical example of the way
metaphysical ideas operate. Logically it is a mere rigmarole of words
but for Marx it was a flood of illumination and for latter-day Marxists,
a source of inspiration."[^79]

In an essay written more than half a century before Joan Robinson's
*Economic Philosophy*, Thorstein Veblen came much closer than Robinson
to "the point" of Marx's work: "... within the domain of unfolding
human culture, which is the field of Marxian speculation at large, Marx
has more particularly devoted his efforts to an analysis and theoretical
formulation of the present situation -- the current phase of the
process, the capitalistic system. And, since the prevailing mode of the
production of goods determines the institutional, intellectual, and
spiritual life of the epoch, by determining the form and method of the
current class struggle, the discussion necessarily begins with the
theory of 'capitalistic production,' or production as carried on under
the capitalistic system."[^80] Veblen was also acutely aware of the
irrelevance of critiques based on a reduction of Marx's theory of value
to a price theory: "Marx's critics commonly identify the concept of
'value' with that of 'exchange value,' and show that the theory of
'value' does not square with the run of the facts of price under the
existing system of distribution, piously hoping thereby to have refuted
the Marxian doctrine, whereas, of course, they have for the most part
not touched it."[^81]

Marx's method, his approach to the problem he raised, was designed to
cope with that problem, not with the problems raised by his critics,
i.e., to answer how the distribution of labor is regulated, and not why
people buy goods, or how resources are allocated, or what determines
market price. Thus it was not in order to define what determines market
price, but in order to focus on the problem of the regulation of labor
that Marx abstracted from the real capitalist economy, that he reduced
it to its bare essentials, so to speak. Capitalism is a commodity
economy; social relations are not established directly but through the
exchange of things. In order to learn how labor is regulated in an
economy where this regulation takes place through the exchange of
things, Marx constructs a model of a "simple commodity economy", namely
an abstract economy in which social relations are established through
the exchange of things, and in which the ratio around which commodities
tend to exchange is determined by the labor-time expended on their
production. The statement that commodities exchange in terms of the
labor-time expended on their production is then a tautology, since it is
contained in the definition of Marx's model. The point of the
abstraction is to focus on the regulation of labor in a commodity
economy, not to answer what determines price in the actual capitalist
society. In this context it is irrelevant to observe that there are
"other factors of production" (such as land and capital) since, as Rubin
points out, "the theory of value does not deal with labor as a technical
factor of production, but with the working activity of people as the
basis of the life of society, and with the social forms within which
that labor is carried out" (Rubin, p. 82). It is also irrelevant to
point out that "things other than labor" are exchanged, since "Marx does
not analyze every exchange of things, but only the equalization of
commodities through which the social equalization of labor is carried
out in the commodity economy" (Rubin, p. 101). Marx's abstraction is not
designed to explain everything; it is designed to explain the regulation
of labor in a commodity economy.

In Chapter 2 of his economics textbook, Paul Samuelson finds Marx's
method totally unacceptable. This academician, whose significance in
American economics can probably be compared to Lysenko's in Soviet
genetics, summarizes Marx's theory of value as follows: "The famous
'labor theory of value' was adapted by Karl Marx from such classical
writers as Adam Smith and David Ricardo. There is no better introduction
to it than to quote from Adam Smith's *Wealth of Nations*. Smith
employed the quaint notion of a Golden Age, a kind of Eden, wherein
dwelt the noble savage before land and capital had become scarce and
when human labor alone counted."[^82] Having demonstrated his
understanding of the theory, Samuelson then proceeds to a critical
analysis of it, using the objective, restrained, non-ideological
language of the American social sciences: "Karl Marx, a century ago in
*Das Kapital* (1867), unfortunately clung more stubbornly than Smith to
the oversimple labor theory. This provided him with a persuasive
terminology for declaiming against 'exploitation of labor', but
constituted bad scientific economics... "[^83] Before driving his
demonstration to its conclusion, Samuelson offers his own theory of the
origins of private property; property grows out of scarcity just as
naturally as babies grow out of wombs: "But suppose that we have left
Eden and Agricultural goods do require, along with labor, fertile land
*that has grown scarce enough to have become private property*."[^84] On
the basis of this profound historical and sociological analysis of the
economy in which he lives, the American Lysenko concludes: "Once factors
other than labor become scarce... The labor theory of value fails.
_Q.E.D._"[^85]

However, in Chapter 34 of the same textbook, the same Samuelson explains
the "Law of Comparative Advantage" with the same method of abstraction
which Marx had used, namely he employs the same labor theory of
value[^86]in the same manner, and he refers to the same source, Ricardo.
Samuelson even tells the reader that later on he "can give some of the
needed qualifications when our simple assumptions are relaxed."[^87] In
the introduction to his textbook, Samuelson even defends the method of
abstraction: "Even if we had more and better data, it would still be
necessary as in every science to *simplify*, to *abstract*, from the
infinite mass of detail. No mind can comprehend a bundle of unrelated
facts. All analysis involves abstraction. It is always necessary to
*idealize*, to omit detail, to set up simple hypotheses and patterns by
which the facts can be related, to set up the right questions before
going out to look at the world as it is."[^88] Thus Samuelson cannot be
opposed to Marx's method of analysis; what bothers him is the subject
matter; what he opposes is analysis which asks why it is that "In our
system individual capitalists earn interest, dividends, and profits, or
rents and royalities on the capital goods that they supply. Every patch
of land and every bit of equipment has a deed, or 'title of ownership,'
that belongs to somebody directly -- or it belongs to a corporation,
then indirectly it belongs to the individual stockholders who own the
corporation."[^89] Samuelson has already told his readers the answer:
"Through profits, society is giving the command over new ventures to
those who have piled up a record of success."[^90]

Rubin points out that Marx's "simple commodity economy" cannot be
treated as a historical stage that preceded capitalism: "This is a
theoretical abstraction and not a picture of the historical transition
from simple commodity economy to capitalist economy" (Rubin, p. 257).
Consequently, the "labor theory of value is a theory of a simple
commodity economy, not in the sense that it explains the type of economy
that preceded the capitalist economy, but in the sense that it describes
only one aspect of the capitalist economy, namely production relations
among commodity producers which are characteristic for every commodity
economy" (Rubin, p. 255). Marx was perfectly aware that he could not
"construct the theory of the capitalist economy directly from the labor
theory of value and... avoid the intermediate links, average profit
and production price. He characterized such attempts as 'attempts to
force and directly fit concrete relations to the elementary relation of
value; attempts which present as existing that which does not
exist"'(Rubin, p. 255).

Rubin's book analyzes the connections between technology and social
relations in a commodity economy where people do not relate to each
other directly but through the products of their labor. In this economy,
a technical improvement is not experienced directly by the producers as
an enhancement of life, and is not accompanied by a conscious
transformation of working activity. The working activity is transformed,
not in response to the enhanced productive power of society, but in
response to changes in the value of products. "The moving force which
transforms the entire system of value originates in the
material-technical process of production. The increase of productivity
of labor is expressed in a decrease of the quantity of concrete labor
which is factually used up in production, on the average. As a result of
this (because of the dual character of labor, as concrete and abstract),
the quantity of this labor, which is considered 'social' or 'abstract,'
i.e., as a share of the total, homogeneous labor of the society,
decreases. The increase of productivity of labor changes the quantity of
abstract labor necessary for production. It causes a change in the value
of the product of labor. A change in the value of products in turn
affects the distribution of social labor among the various branches of
production... this is the schema of a commodity economy in which value
plays the role of regulator, establishing equilibrium in the
distribution of social labor among the various branches..."(Rubin,
p. 66).

In the concrete conditions of the capitalist economy this process is
more complex, but in spite of the added complexities the regulation of
the productive activities of people is still carried out through the
movement of things. In the capitalist economy "the distribution of
capital leads to the distribution of social labor" (Rubin, p. 226).
However, "our goal (as before) is to analyze the laws of distribution of
social labor" (Rubin, p. 228), and consequently "we must resort to a
round-about path and proceed to a preliminary analysis of the laws of
distribution of capital". (Ibid.) The task becomes further complicated
by the fact that, "if we assume that the distribution of labor is
determined by the distribution of capital which acquires meaning as an
intermediate link in the causal chain, then the formula of the
distribution of labor depends on the formula of the distribution of
capitals: unequal masses of labor which are activated by equal capitals
are equalized with each other" (p. 235). The gap between the distribution
of capital and the distribution of labor is bridged through the concept
of the organic composition of capital, which establishes a relation
between the two processes (p. 237).

In his analysis, Rubin assumes "the existence of competition among
capitalists engaged in different branches of production" and also "the
possibility for the transfer of capital from one branch to another" (p. 
230)[^91]. With these assumptions, "the rate of profit becomes the
regulator of the distribution of capital" (p. 229). Rubin defines profit
as "the surplus of the selling price of the commodity over the costs of
its production" (p. 230). And a change in the cost of production is "in
the last analysis caused by changes in the productivity of labor and in
the labor-value of some goods" (p. 251). Schematically, the process can
be summarized as follows. Technical change causes a change in the
productivity of labor. This changes the amount of alienated, abstract
labor which is congealed in certain commodities, and consequently
changes the value of those commodities. This in turn affects the costs
of production of branches which use the given commodities in their
production process, and thus affects the profits of capitalists in those
branches. The change in the profitability of the affected branches leads
capitalists to move their capitals to other branches, and this movement
of capitals in turn leads to a movement of workers to the other branches
(although the movement of laborers is not necessarily proportional to
the movement of capitals, since this depends on the organic composition
of capital). Rubin's conclusion is that the regulation of labor in the
capitalist society differs only in complexity, but not in kind, from the
regulation of labor in a simple commodity economy: "Anarchy \[sic\] in
social production; the absence of direct social relations among
producers; mutual influence of their working activities through things
which are the products of their labor; the connection between the
movement of production relations among people and the movement of things
in the process of material production; 'reification' of production
relations, the transformation of their properties into the properties of
'things'- *all of these phenomena of commodity fetishism are equally
present in every commodity economy, simple as well as capitalist*. They
characterize labor-value and production price the same way" (p. 253,
Rubin's italics). The first volume of _Capital_ provides the context, the
second volume describes the mechanism, and the third volume treats in
detail the formidable process through which "the object produced by
labour, its product, now stands opposed to it as an *alien being*, as a
*power independent* of the producer;" the process through which "the
life which he has given to the object sets itself against him as an
alien and hostile force."

Fredy Perlman, Kalamazoo, 1968

[^1]: Paut A. Samuelson, _Economics, An Introductory Analysis_, New
	York: McGraw Hill, 1967, Seventh Edition, p. 1 and p. 5 (Italics by
	Samuelson). Samuelson's book is the prototype of the textbook
	currently used in American universities to teach students the
	principles of economics.

[^2]: Robert W. Campbell, "Marx, Kantorovich and Novozhilov: _Stoimost_
	versus Reality", _Slavic Review_, October, 1961, pp. 402418.
	Reprinted in Wayne A. Leeman, ed., _Capitalism, Market Socialism and
	Central Planning_, Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1963, pp. 102--118, and
	also in Harry G. Shaffer, The Soviet Economy, New York: Appleton
	Century-Crofts, 1963, pp. 350--366. Campbell is currently an
	American Authority on Marxian Economics.

[^3]: Abram Bergson, _The Economics of Soviet Planning_, New Haven: Yale
	University Press, 1964, p. 3. Bergson is director of the Russian
	Research Center at Harvard University and, like Campbell, he is
	currently an Authority on Marxian Economics.

[^4]: After the title of William Appleman Williams' _The Great Evasion_,
	Chicago: Quadrangle Books, 1964. Williams vividly describes some of
	the techniques of the evasion: "The tactics of escape employed in
	this headlong dash from reality would fill a manual of equivocation,
	a handbook of hairsplitting, and a guidebook to changing the
	subject." (p. 18).

[^5]: I. I. Rubin, _Ocherki po teorii stoimosti Marksa_, Moakva:
	Gosudarstvennoe Izdatel'stvo, 3^rd^ edition, 1928, p. 41; present
	translation, p. 31. Rubin's book was not re-issued in the Soviet
	Union after 1928, and it has never before been translated. Future
	page citations in this _Introduction_ refer to the present
	translation.

[^6]: Samuelson, _op. cit._, p. 1.

[^7]: For example: "Curiously enough, it was the very young Marx
	(writing in the early 1840's) who developed ideas very much in the
	mood of other systems of thought that have such great appeal to the
	mentality of the 1950's and 1960's: psychoanalysis, existentialism,
	and Zen Buddhism. And contrariwise, the work of the mature Marx,
	which stressed economic and political analysis, has been less
	compelling to intellectuals of the advanced Western nations since
	the end of World War II." Robert Blamer, _Alienation and Freedom_:
	_The Factory Worker and His Industry_, Chicago: University of
	Chicago Press, 1964, p. I.

[^8]: Karl Marx, _The Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844_, New
	York: International Publishers, 1964, p. 178.

[^9]: _Ibid._, p. 176. (Italics in original.)

[^10]: _Ibid._, p. 177.

[^11]: _Ibid._, p. 184.

[^12]: _Ibid._, p. 185.

[^13]: _Ibid._, p. 172.

[^14]: Karl Marx, _Theses on Feuerbach_, in T.B. Bottomore and
	Maximillien Rubel, editors _Karl Marx, Selected Writings in
	Sociology and Social Philosophy_, New York: McGraw Hill, 1964, p.
	68.

[^15]: _Ibid._, p. 67.

[^16]: Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, _The German Ideology_, Moscow:
	Progress Publishers, 1964, pp. 58--59.

[^17]: From "Excerpt-Notes of 1844" in _Writings of the Young Marx on
	Philosophy and Society_, translated and edited by Loyd D. Easton and
	Kurt H. Guddat, Garden City: Anchor Books, 1967, p. 281. (Italics in
	original)

[^18]: _Ibid._, p. 281--282.

[^19]: Blauner, _Alienation and Freedom: The Factory Worker and his
	Industry_, p. 15.

[^20]: _Ibid._, p. 3

[^21]: From "Excerpt-Notes of 1844," _loc. cit._, p. 275--276.

[^22]: _Ibid._, p. 272.

[^23]: Bottomore and Rubel, eds., _op. cit._, p. 170.

[^24]: _Ibid._, p. 171 and 170.

[^25]: Karl Marx, _Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844_ New
	York: International Publishers, 1964, p. 150.

[^26]: Veljko Korac, "In Search of Human Society," in Erich Fromm,
	editor, _Socialist Humanism_, Garden City: Anchor Books, 1966, p. 6.
	(Italics in original.)

[^27]: Marx, _Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844_, p. 146.

[^28]: Bottomore and Rubel, eds., _op. cit._, pp. 243--244

[^29]: Easton and Guddat, _Writings of the Young Marx on Philosophy and
	Society_, p. 262--263.

[^30]: Marx, _Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts_, p. 169.

[^31]: Erich Fromm, _Beyond the Chains of Illusion_, New York: Pocket
	Books, Inc., 1962, p. 32.

[^32]: _Ibid._, p. 49.

[^33]: _Ibid._, pp. 196--197.

[^34]: Marx and Engels, _The German Ideology_. p. 23--24.

[^35]: Letter of Marx to P. V. Annenkov. December 28, 1846, in Karl
	Marx, _The Poverty of Philosophy_, New York: International
	Publishers, 1963. p. 191.

[^36]: Marx and Engels, _The German Ideology_, p. 32.

[^37]: _Ibid._, p. 37.

[^38]: Marx, _The Poverty of Philosophy_, p. 109.

[^39]: Marx and Engels, _The German Ideology_, p. 50.

[^40]: Letter of Marx to Annenkov, _loc. cit._, p. 181.

[^41]: Marx and Engels, _The German Ideology_, p. 475.

[^42]: Karl Marx, _A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy_,
	Chicago: Charles H. Kerr & Co., 1904, p. 12. It is interesting to
	note that at this point, Marx begins to develop a general theory of
	cultural development and cultural change, or what the anthropologist
	Leslie White has called a "science of culture" (See Leslie A. White,
	_The Science of Culture_, New York: Grove Press, 1949) The paragraph
	which contains the passage quoted above also contains the following,
	formulation: "Just as our opinion of an individual is not based on
	what he thinks of himself, so can we not judge of such a period of
	transformation by its own consciousness; on the contrary, this
	consciousness must rather be explained from the contradictions of
	material life, from the existing conflict between the material
	forces of production and the relations of production. No social
	order ever disappears before all the productive forces, for which
	there is room in it, have been developed; and new higher relations
	of production never appear before the material conditions of their
	existence have matured in the womb of the old society. Therefore,
	mankind always takes up only such problems as it can solve; since,
	looking at the matter more closely, we will always find that the
	problem itself arises only when the material conditions necessary
	for its solution already exist or are at least in the process of
	formation." (pp. 12--13.)

[^43]: Marx and Engels, _The German Ideology_, p. 46.

[^44]: C. Wright Mills did not see the connection between the concept of
	alienation and Marx's later work, namely the three volumes of
	_Capital_, and consequently Mills reduced the question of alienation
	to "the question of the attitude of men toward the work they do." As
	a result, Mills was disappointed with Marx on this score: "to say
	the least, the condition in which Marx left the conception of
	alienation is quite incomplete, and brilliantly ambiguous." (C.
	Wright Mills, _The Marxists_ New York: Dell Publishing Co., 1962, p.
	112.)

[^45]: Marx, _A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy_, p.
    30.

[^46]: _Ibid._

[^47]: Samuelson, _Economics_, p. 542.

[^48]: David Ricardo, _The Principles of Political Economy and
	Taxation_, Homewood, Illinois: Richard D. Irwin, Inc., 1963, p. 45

[^49]: Marx, _Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844_, p. 150.

[^50]: Karl Marx, _Capital: A Critique of Political Economy_, Volume
	III, Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1966, p. 819.

[^51]: Marx, _Capital_, III, p. 819.

[^52]: Samuelson, _Economics_, p. 591.

[^53]: Marx, _Capital_, III, p. 816.

[^54]: Marx, _Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844_, p. 169.

[^55]: Samuelson, _Economics_, p. 572.

[^56]: Marx, _Capital_ III, p. 830, where the last part of this passage
	reads: "... in which _Monsieur le Capital and Madame la Terre_ do
	their ghost-walking as social characters and at the same time
	directly as mere things." The version quoted above is from _Marx on
	Economics_, edited by Robert Freedman, New York: Harcourt, Brace &
	World, 1961, p. 65.

[^57]: Karl Marx, _Capital_, Volume I, Moscow: Progress Publishers,
	1965, p. 72; New York: Random House, 1906 edition, p. 83.

[^58]: Samuelson, _Economics_, p. 591.

[^59]: Marx, _A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy_, p.
    31.

[^60]: Marx, _Capital_, III, p. 824.

[^61]: Samuelson, _Economics_, p. 602.

[^62]: Marx, _Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844_, p. 108; the
	passage given above is quoted from Bottomore and Rubell, _op. cit._,
	p. 170--171.

[^63]: Daniet R. Fusfeld, _The Age of the Economist_, Glenview,
	Illinois: Scott, Foresman & Co., 1966, p. 74.

[^64]: Jean Baptiste Say, _Traité d'économie politique_, first published
	in 1803. Augustin _Cournot, Recherches sur les principes
	mathematiques de la theone des richesses_, t838. The revival was
	carried out in the 1870's by Karl Menger, William Stantey Jevons,
	and Leon Watras, and the work was "synthesized" by Alfred Marshall
	in the 1890's.

[^65]: _Op. cit._, p. 73.

[^66]: Robert Campbell, "Marxian Analysis, Mathematical Methods, and
	Scientific Economic Planning", in Shaffer, _op. cit._, p. 352.

[^67]: Fusfetd, op. cit., p. 74.

[^68]: Campbell, _loc. cit_

[^69]: _Ibid._

[^70]: Fusfeld, _op. cit._, p. 74

[^71]: _Ibid._, .75.

[^72]: _Economics_, pp. 601--602; quoted earlier.

[^73]: Oskar Lange, _On the Economic Theory of Socialism_, New York:
	McGraw Hill, 1964 (published together with an essay by Fred M.
	Taylor), p. 141.

[^74]: _Ibid._, pp. 132--133.

[^75]: _Ibid._, p. 133.

[^76]: Fred M. Gottheil, _Marx's Economic Predictions_, Evanston:
	Northwestern University Press, 1966, p. 27.

[^77]: Joan Robinson, _Economic Philosophy_, Garden City: Anchor Books,
	1964, p. 35.

[^78]: _Ibid._, p. 37, Italics in original.

[^79]: _Ibid._

[^80]: Thorstein Veblen, "The Socialist Economics of Karl Marx", _The
	Quarterly Journal of Economics_, Vol: XX, Aug., 1906; reprinted in
	_The Portable Veblen_, edited by Max Lerner, New York: Viking Press,
	1948, p. 284. In a footnote, Veblen adds the explanation that "in
	Marxian usage 'capitalistic production' means production of goods
	for the market by hired labour under the direction of employers who
	own (or control) the means of production and are engaged in industry
	for the sake of a profit."

[^81]: _Ibid._, pp. 287--288.

[^82]: Samuelson, _Economics_, p. 27.

[^83]: _Ibid._, p. 29.

[^84]: _Ibid._, italics by Samuelson.

[^85]: _Ibid._

[^86]: From Samuelson's explanation of the law of comparative advantage:
	"In America a unit of food costs 1 days' labor and a unit of
	clothing costs 2 days' labor. In Europe the cost is 3 days' labor
	for food and 4 days' labor for clothing," etc. _Ibid._, p. 649.

[^87]: _Ibid._, p. 648.

[^88]: _Ibid._, p. 8. Samuelson's italics.

[^89]: _Ibid._, p. 50.

[^90]: _Ibid._, p. 602.

[^91]: Rubin does not treat cases where the assumptions of perfect
	competition and perfect mobility of capital do not hold. Thus he
	does not extend his analysis to problems of imperialism, monopoly,
	militarism, domestic colonies (which today would come under the
	heading of racism). Rubin also does not treat changes in production
	relations caused by the increased scale and power of productive
	forces, some of which Marx had begun to explore in the third volume
	of _Capital_ and does not treat its development or its
	transformations.
