---
title: A Modest Proposal for How the Bad Old Days Will End
author: Reinvention of Everyday Life
date: 1975
description: Published by an American group called The Reinvention of Everyday Life, then republished in the UK by Social Revolution (who were forced out of the SPGB, joined Solidarity, and later joined Wildcat). This red texts version comes from what was hosted on the Subversion website at <https://www.oocities.org/athens/acropolis/8195/blasts/badolddays.htm>.
...

## Introduction from the Pandora's Books edition.

This article was first produced in 1975 by _REINVENTION OF EVERYDAY
LIFE_ in California. It was reprinted in the UK by Social Revolution
(who have since merged with Solidarity). We are reprinting it because
it's once again unavailable in this country, and because despite its
rather starry-eyed optimism, it outlines very clearly social and
political perspectives we would broadly agree with. That said, it's no
sacred text and we don't agree with every word. No pamphlet will change
the world -- however we found this one interesting and we hope you do as
well.

Pandora's Books, Dec. 1981.

## A Modest Proposal for How the Bad Old Days Will End

THE COLLAPSE OF THE WORLD AS WE KNOW IT HAS ALREADY BEGUN.

EVERYONE KNOWS THIS.

EVERYONE FEELS IT IN THEIR BONES.

ALL THE ATTEMPTS TO DENY IT ARE ENOUGH TO PROVE IT.

It's as though everyone's waiting for something but no one knows what.
Whether I find myself wandering around in the city or in the
graveyard-like suburbs, this feeling of despair seems to haunt everyone
even in their sleep.

Meanwhile we just grow more isolated from each other. When I meet
someone on the street we really have nothing to say to each other
because nothing has really happened. So empty words are exchanged and we
stumble away awkwardly. Nobody seems to enjoy anything anymore. Nobody
seems to know why they're alive. What everybody does know, however, is
that this society is falling apart, and that all the attempts to hold it
together just make it more hideous.

As far back as I can remember everyone around me spent most of their
lives sacrificing in order to survive. There was, of course, always a
certain degree of marginal freedom but now even this is vanishing. And
as politicians talk about the need for yet more sacrifice, the mass
media pumps out more ways to glorify misery.

It's not as though things used to be gem or anything. But perhaps never
before have so many people had the feeling that everything has become so
pointless -- that each day is like the last, only a little more dull, a
little more empty, a little more exhausting.

Surely there lurks inside each of us a subjective passion such as may-be
we experienced in childhood but have been too embarrassed to think about
for years -- the desire to be in love always -- the kind of inspiration
which once unleashed could move mountains and remake the world.
Currently our energy is being constantly used up just to keep things the
same. Artists have nothing left to express but their emptiness, and the
emptiness of a society which can no longer find any reason to exist. All
joy has gone out of music. All the new processing and quasi-technical
perfection cannot compensate for the total absence of inspiration. And
whatever remedies are adopted are usually worse than the disease. Jobs
are becoming so meaningless and so exhausting that many people would
prefer to be unemployed. "Leisure time" is becoming as boring as work.
All the "problem solving" of the sociologists, economists, psychologists
and urban planners just become ways to make more acceptable the
humiliation we experience every day.

Nonetheless, I know this misery will go on only so long as we allow it
to.

The spectacle is like a supermarket of false alternatives. In spite of
the supposed "opposition" between capitalism and "Communism," the
difference between them is like the difference between Pepsi Cola and
Seven Up. "Communism" -- as it exists in Russia, China, Cuba, Vietnam,
etc -- is just a state-monopolized form of capitalism. But whether you
live under private corporate capitalism or bureaucratic state
capitalism, it's essentially the same old crap. Everywhere people sell
their lives in order to survive. Every where daily life has been reduced
to a mere series of humiliations. Even [in?] "free time" there isn't any
freedom. Our whole environment has been produced in an alien form.

And now, as world capitalism is falling apart, its spokesmen tell us
that it's our fault for being too "greedy," too "selfish," too
"affluent."

But there is nothing mysterious about the present breakdown of social
production. It is nothing other than the outcome of the contradiction
between the forces of production [^01] and the social relations of
production. Now capitalism has become a fetter on our existence and
development as genuinely human beings. But capitalism is only the
highest form of commodity [^02] (exchange-value) production. While for
thousands of years the commodity form helped to develop the productive
forces and thus to prepare the conditions for a really free society, it
has now become a fetter (and in fact the last essential fetter) on our
further development as human beings.

Though this contradiction exists in every part of the world, it is first
most visible in the most advanced and overdeveloped countries
(especially the U.S.). Thus the active contradiction between use-value
and exchange-value can be seen constantly in the most common acts of our
daily life. Every time you stand in a line at a supermarket checkstand
you do this not to accomplish any productive or socially useful
function. The only reason you're waiting in line is to pay for the food,
even though it would be every bit as good whether or not you pay for it.
But unless you pay for it, it cannot be realized as a commodity, as
exchange-value. In terms of its social use-value it would be much
simpler and indeed more efficient, if you simply walked out with it.
(But don't get caught trying!)

But exchange-value is not a mere accessory tacked on to an otherwise
neutral reality. On the contrary, value is the motivating force of all
production in capitalist society. Everything is produced as value and
its use-value is shaped accordingly.

Thus, it is no accident that everything is being designed to break down
or be thrown away, that "education" is as shitty as it is, or that
"culture," "art" and "entertainment" have become so uninspired. The
entirety of the existing mode of production is specifically capitalist.
While at work we experience no real freedom or self-expression of any
kind. The only reason we work is to get paid. But when we get off work
we still are alienated -- i.e., we still have little or no control over
any of the conditions which determine how we spend our time.

Thus "leisure" time -- or "free" time -- can be used for nothing but a
repetition of the most meaningless and tedious trivialities -- such as
shopping, watching boring television shows, etc. Even when we're eating
and sleeping -- perfectly normal human activities -- we're really only
recuperating to prepare ourselves for more alienated work.

As the contradiction grows more explicit we see the trend of contracting
social reproduction. In many parts of the world capitalists are finding
that now they can sell more (in dollar terms) by producing less -- hence
the phony "shortages" of various sorts, as well as the rapidly rising
prices. They are finding fewer profitable things in which to channel the
labor force (hence "unemployment"). Capitalism's weakest elements are
rapidly falling onto the historical scrapheap: more and more small
shopkeepers are going under (just take a walk downtown and look at all
the closing out sales), smaller firms are going bankrupt or being bought
out.

Capitalism's most rugged form will probably prove to be in countries
where there is the most developed State rationalization of the capital
accumulation process (e.g., China), i.e. the so-called "Socialist" and
"Communist" countries.

As the collapse becomes more evident each day, spokesmen for all the
different factions of Capital rush to compete with their respective
"explanations." And as though the "opposition" between "liberals" and
"conservatives" weren't absurd enough, the circus has added the official
"Left" as an even more comical sideshow.

For the "Left," of course, the problem with private capitalism is only
that it doesn't do what it's supposed to on its own terms -- that there
aren't enough "jobs," that people don't get high enough ("fair") wages
for selling their lives, that women and "third world" people don't get
their fair share of the shit pie, that Capital accumulation doesn't go
on peacefully as it should.

The "Leftists" have so little understanding of the actual workings of
capitalism that when its tendency toward centralization and
monopolization is pushed to an extreme such as in Russia or China --
they think that it is no longer capitalism. In spite of their
self-acclaimed "radicalism" they are really the staunchest of
conservatives. And as capitalism -- the highest form of hierarchical
society -- is falling apart, they dutifully try to come up with new ways
of holding it together.

But all the confusion created by the "Left" and the "Right" alike cannot
hide forever the fact that since the time capitalism began there has
been a real movement for a new and genuinely human way of life, for a
society in which the full and free development of every individual forms
the ruling principle. This movement has emerged again and again. Each
time it has been crushed, but only to re-emerge, perhaps years or
decades later. And almost every time it has emerged in the twentieth
century the "Right" and the "Left" have formed a Holy Alliance to
suppress it.

Thus, for instance, in Russia amidst the famine and general breakdown of
production which occurred during World War One and the Civil War which
followed -- the workers and sailors of Kronstadt (a naval fortress city
on an island near present-day Leningrad) took social production directly
into their own hands. Without any specialized or separate "leadership,"
they reclaimed all social territory, carried out expropriations,
redistributed land and began a comprehensive program to coordinate
socially the use of all available resources, as well as improving and
expanding production in agriculture (on hitherto unused land on the
outskirts of the city), construction of buildings, etc. All this was
organized responsibly throughout the city (approx. pop. 50,000) as a
whole. In addition the workers and sailors of Kronstadt maintained an
"operating fund," so to speak, from voluntary donations by the people of
whatever was beyond their own immediate needs. This was used to acquire
various resources (tools, seeds, etc.) by the city's population
collectively, and in addition, to send revolutionary speakers and
agitators throughout Russia.

All major decisions were made by the people themselves in workplaces and
popular assemblies in other public areas. Coordination of action was
carried out through elected delegates (from among the Workers and
sailors) who were strictly mandated for specific tasks only and who
could be recalled by their assemblies at any time.

In March of 1921, after three and a half years, the workers' and
sailors' revolution at Kronstadt was crushed. Its participants and
sympathizers were either shot on sight, imprisoned, or forced to flee
"revolutionary" Russia. But the final suppression of the Kronstadt
Commune and the massacre of its people was not carried out by the "White
Army" or by foreign imperialists. They were crushed militarily by the
so-called "Red Army," with Leon Trotsky at its head and with explicit
orders from Lenin and the rest of the top Leaders of the Russian
"Communist" Party.

None of this should be surprising. The workers' and sailors' revolution
which broke out at Kronstadt was qualitatively different from and in
direct opposition to the movement which was led by Lenin and the other
top Leaders of the "Communist" Party. It was, though in a crude and
embryonic form, a movement for a free and classless society -- the real
movement I have been speaking of.

For several decades now, the "Right" and "Left" have conspired to hide
this movement from us or to falsify and distort its reality beyond
recognition. Both the "Right" and the "Left" would like us to believe
that totalitarian state-capitalism (which they call "Communism") is the
only possible alternative to private corporate capitalism, and that
shitheads like the "Symbionese Liberation Army" are revolutionaries. All
these people have a stake in keeping things the same.

But I will surrender nothing voluntarily to my enemies. Not even words.
Thus, in spite of all the ways, in which reality and the words
associated with it have been distorted and misrepresented by these
people, I insist on calling this movement, this desire, by its real
historical name. I insist on calling it what its most articulate
protagonists have called it for over a hundred and thirty years -- it is
the communist movement. The real communist movement.

Once again I must emphasize that the relationship between the real
communist movement on the one hand, and the bureaucrats and aspiring
bureaucrats of totalitarian state-capitalism -- the so-called
"Communists" -- is a relationship of total opposition and complete
antagonism. It cannot be otherwise. It makes no difference whether
they're Trotskyists, Maoists, Stalinists, Guevarists, or just part of
the neo-Leninist mish-mash. It is precisely because I am a communist
that they are my enemies. I am in opposition to them every bit as much
as the revolutionaries of Kronstadt were in opposition to the
"Communist" Party bureaucrats who ordered their massacre.

Despite the suppression from all sides, the real communist movement did
not perish with Kronstadt. It has emerged again and again since; in the
Spanish Revolution of 1936-37; in the Hungarian Revolution of 1956 --
which was crushed by tanks from Russia (much to the enthusiasm of
Mao-Tse-Tung); and in the insurrection in France of May-June 1968 --
which the French "Left" did everything possible to subordinate to their
"leadership" and to reduce it to a bunch of reformist "demands."

It has emerged as well in events such as the street festival in Detroit
in 1967 and the revolt which broke out in "socialist" Poland in 1970-71
where workers happily looted state-owned stores and burned down the
"Communist Party" headquarters while singing the Internationale!

As for ourselves: In place of capitalist society with its classes and
class antagonisms, we shall have an association in which the free
development of each individual is the condition for the free development
of all. Production for profit will be replaced by production for
pleasure. The end of the law of value will be the decisive beginning of
the end of all alienations, of all the fetishes to which people have
been sacrificed since the first human beings walked the earth.

The great insurrections of the past (Kronstadt, Hungary 1956, Paris
1871, Spain 1936-37, Seattle 1919, France 1968, Poland, 1970-71, etc.)
and the new life which they announced, were only the faintest hints of
the fantastic possibilities of modern world revolution. As we take over
we can begin immediately to rebuild the world in a form which is fit for
our playful habitation. Some structures can simply be eliminated. Many
other things -- such as houses, machinery and transportation -- can be
entirely redesigned and rebuilt.

No "system" can guarantee successful social production. The life blood
of production in communist society can only be the conscious desire and
energy of each of us. Nonetheless the organizational forms of past
communist experiences (such as Kronstadt and the Spanish Revolution of
1936-37) as well as the nature of the present productive forces,
strongly imply much of how the new world could be organized.

During the earlier parts of the revolution, the organizational mode of
the new society will be growing organically in the process of over
throwing the old one [^03]. As we steal back more and more of the means
of social production we can use these not only for our own immediate
needs, but also as a means to escalate the revolutionary process
further.

When the ruling classes are fully overthrown we will be free to take on
the re-organization of everything. We can then meet publicly to discuss
our real needs and desires.

We could easily begin production by regularly holding popular assemblies
in local public areas and production places of all sorts. Here ideas and
plans could be initiated and elaborated with the full and direct
participation of all those concerned. (Obviously not everyone will be
interested in every question: the point is that anyone could, if they
chose, participate in making any decision they think is important.)

When initial decisions have been made, the people at the assemblies can
elect delegates who will then meet in regional and finally global
councils with other delegates sent from assemblies throughout the world.
They will meet simply to coordinate decisions already made by the people
at their assemblies and will have no separate governing power of any
kind. Their function will be rotated periodically among the population
and monopolized by no one. Furthermore, they could be removed and
replaced by their assemblies at any time.

Even for planning and coordination of world-wide production, it is hard
to say to what extent such meetings of delegates will prove necessary.
With telecommunications equipment already existing, it would, in many
cases, be simpler for the local assemblies to contact each other
directly via the airwaves, and take part in each other's discussions.
Such methods would be especially useful if you consider that in some
cases even initial plans could not be made only locally and might
immediately require direct dialogues between the respective assemblies.

By means of such telecommunications networks as well as modern data
storage and processing, each of us could be in instantaneous contact
with each other in any part of the world, as well as with all the wealth
of knowledge of the entirety of human history. Resources could be
coordinated globally in order to maximize use-value and minimize
difficulties in fulfilling desires.

Not all projects would necessarily be carried out even initially by
people who are already concentrated in a particular geographic area. Any
individual would have immediate access to broadcast his/her ideas all
over the world in order to find others who are interested and who might
have particular knowledge and skills he/she would find appropriate.

People from different parts of the world who shared a common fantasy,
fascination or innovative idea could if they chose, come together and
shape entire landscapes.

We could begin to relate as human beings instead of as commodities. No
longer would people be compelled to be competitive with each other.
Instead the enrichment of others would only be a further enrichment of
ourselves when we experience each other. The full and free development
of each individual around us will be our own direct self-interest.

Each of us will be a co-owner of the entirety of the world's wealth and
means of production, as well as of the entire natural environment.

Whereas in capitalist society each individual can usually only pursue
his interests narrowly, at the expense of others, in communist society
every individual will have as his own the entirety of society and of
social wealth. Each individual's pursuit of an ever-richer life would
mean the pursuit of an ever-richer society.

Planning and decision making will not be a separate or specialized
activity. It will be an integrated part of production and of life, just
like any other.

The direct control people will have over the production process applies
also, of course, to their immediate environment. For the day-to-day
matters of running, for instance, a given factory, decisions will be
made at assemblies of all those involved.

But nobody's activities need be restricted to a given "job" or locality.
Each person can fish in the morning, plow the soil in the afternoon,
compose and play music before dinner and write poetry in the evening,
chop wood one day, cast steel the next, build castles one month and sail
around the world the next (perhaps distributing the goodies they've
made). And all of this without ever having to become as such a
fisherman, a farm-worker, a musician, a poet, a woodsman, a steelworker,
a construction worker or a sailor.

There will no longer be a "work day." Nor a separate "leisure" time.
Just life -- just the process of consciously creating and recreating
ourselves and our world.

Communist society will be not only the full appropriation of the ideas
of all the great visionaries, dreamers and mad geniuses of the past
(Scriabin, William Morris, Fourier, the Pre-Raphaelites, Lautreamont,
William Blake, the early surrealists, etc.), but furthermore the
realization of their outrageous dreams and fantasies (as well as our
own), made concrete and possible now by the development of the real
forces of production, as well as by the decay and collapse of the
present "system."

With all the modern means of production at our individual disposal, each
of us will have a direct self-interest in the building and rebuilding of
the world in the image of our desires, and in participating fully in the
accurate executing of this. Successful production in communist society
will depend only on the real and immediate determination of each
individual to live their life fully, to realize their wildest
imaginations -- in the real world (that, by the way, is "how the work
will get done").

As for the Trotskyists, Maoists, and neo-Christians of the "Left," they
can take their "transitional demands," "correct leadership" and
"revolutionary" self-sacrifice -- and shove it up their respective
asses. The communist movement can develop only as an insatiable thirst
for life -- the same inspiration which made Scriabin insist that he
could fly -- or, as a 19th century egomaniac (Karl Marx) put it: "a
revolutionary daring which hurls at its adversaries the defiant phrase:
I am nothing, but I must be everything!"

There will no longer be any fetishized abstractions to mediate people's
lives -- there will be no law of value no commodity exchange, no State
and no religion to decide our activities for us; no "general interest,"
no "national interest," no pre-defined "human nature." Just us. Just our
desires, skills, imagination, passions, and intelligence -- developed
over centuries and now freed for the first time -- with all the world at
our disposal.

>"THE SOCIETY WHICH HAS ABOLISHED EVERY KIND OF ADVENTURE, MAKES ITS OWN
>ABOLITION THE ONLY POSSIBLE ADVENTURE." - Wall painting, Paris, May
>1968

Communist revolution like all revolutions, is the outcome of a struggle
between antagonistic classes. Every mode of production has produced
insurrectionary classes who ultimately overthrow or effectively abolish
that mode of production and all the social relations built on it.

Capitalism has produced the largest and the most important (potentially)
revolutionary class in all history -- the proletariat. The proletariat
consists of all of us who are separated from control of the means of
social production and therefore have no control over our own life
activity [^04]. The means of social production includes everything used
for the production and reproduction of human beings and of society: not
only factories, mines, raw materials, agricultural land, etc., but also
all the implements and all the space and territory which are part of our
overall life process -- everything from printing presses, television
equipment and educational institutions right down to the very air we
breath, the water we drink and the sounds which we hear around us. We
have no control over any of these because Capital has taken them all
over and uses them all as Capital. Everything that is produced -- and
increasingly everything that is even tolerated -- is produced and
tolerated only insofar as it serves the needs of Capital -- i.e., of
exchange-value which expands quantitatively for the mere sake of
expanding (regardless of form).

Capital is busily shaping all the world in its image. Just look around
you -- anywhere. But Capital is not some natural or supernatural force
determining our activity. It is nothing other than our own activity when
we disown it -- which reproduces this form of life. Capital is not a
thing, but a social relation between people mediated by things. Quite
simply, Capital is something we do every day. Every day the means of
social production pass through our hands. We reproduce society and we
reproduce it as Capital. It is only our willingness to comply and our
lack of conscious organization for ourselves as a class, that allow the
world to go on in its present, hideous form.

Imagine now that one day no one came to work, no one went shopping and
no one went to school. If this were sustained, within a very short
period of time capitalism would grind to a halt. Unfortunately, in this
case, so would human society. But imagine, on the other hand that one
day proletarians everywhere took over all the work places-factories,
offices, schools, stores, television stations, gas stations, telephone
facilities, oil refineries, computer centers, etc. -- in every part of
the world at once! No military force in the world could possibly be
large or powerful enough to stop us. I realize I have exaggerated what
is actually possible ... but only slightly. All we, i.e. the world
proletariat, lack is the conscious desire and unity to pull it off.
Until we realize this desire and unity, we will continue, collectively,
to kick our own ass every day. So long as, at any given time, the
majority of us are willing to comply, each isolated individual or small
group of individuals is powerless to resist.

But above all, if we are ever to regain our own lives, we must begin
attempting to regain our own minds and our own emotions. From the time
we were born we have been conditioned to become submissive, humble and
crippled. We have been taught to be "realistic" and repress our desires,
to accept humiliation as a natural and necessary part of life.

This authoritarian conditioning begins in our families while we are
infants and is further carried out in school, in church and in all the
other institutions of capitalist society. It is just such conditioning
which makes us complaisant in our misery and thus suitable for the
slavery of capitalist society [^05].

It is this same authoritarian character (as Wilhelm Reich called it)
which bureaucrats and aspiring bureaucrats are appealing to when they
attempt to "lead the masses."

But worst of all, many proletarians try to justify and defend their
authoritarian character and will even resent others who begin to break
out of their own. There is nothing more counter-revolutionary than
self-denial and fear of freedom. Nothing.

The contradiction between the forces of production and the social
relations of production exists inside each of us. We are the greatest
productive force of all -- and every day the individuality of each of us
comes into direct conflict with our role as members of an enslaved class
-- with the way of life that is forced upon us.

Unlike any previous revolutionary movement, the communist movement must
be carried through actively and consciously by the overwhelming majority
of the world's people. No "vanguard" Party can "lead" us, "represent"
us, or seize Power "on our behalf."

Instead we must begin organizing ourselves. We can begin opening an
active dialogue among all of us who are already consciously
revolutionary, in every part of the world. But the dialogue must also
extend to the rest of the proletariat.

We can begin organizing where we live and where we work, forming
"cells," so to speak, in workplaces and in all areas of social life.
This is the beginning of the abolition of Capital from within (the
proletarians, while essential to Capital, are also the living negation
of Capital). Such groups can intervene into many potentially
revolutionary situations -- especially those which most directly reflect
the crisis of Capital. We can intervene into every part of social
production (in the broadest sense of the term) -- at workplaces, college
and high school campuses, shopping centers, public meetings,
neighborhoods, buses, rock concerts, laundromats, waiting rooms (at
everything from welfare offices to hospitals), unemployment lines, etc.
-- in short, everywhere that social life exists and has been colonized
by Capital.

We can intervene with every means possible -- leaflets, graffiti, wall
posters, music, newspapers -- and of course direct conversation.

Whenever it can be done effectively, direct encounter with people is
best. There are so many situations every day where people really do see
through everything and it would only be a matter of one individual being
able to articulate what everyone there already knows. Such situations
occur whenever the absurdity of exchange-value relations are
demonstrated most explicitly -- such as when people are forced to wait
in lines for something they don't even want (such as to pay for
something or to pick up a stupid bureaucratic "form").

Unfortunately, the spoken word and the acted gesture are usually quite
limited in their effect over time. Someone can go home after a really
good conversation with a stranger, but unless the encounter is followed
up with something, in a couple of weeks it will probably be as though it
hadn't happened. But the written word can also be used creatively and
subversively.

With the written word (such as in a leaflet or wall poster) it is
important to be able to describe well what people are experiencing at
the time they see it -- such as the hatred they already feel for the
office or factory where they're working at the time, or the alienation
and boredom they feel at the laundromat in which they're sitting.
(Imagine yourself being bored stiff sitting in a laundromat and someone
hands you a leaflet about being bored stiff sitting in a laundromat.)
Hopefully such literature could then elaborate further in a way that
would encourage the reader to look critically at the whole of his/her
alienated life, as well as how the totality of this alienation could be
superseded.

These different methods can, of course, be combined -- such as if you
stick around where you've distributed literature and are prepared to
further discuss such ideas, or if you have literature on hand to help
follow up a verbal encounter.

For really effective revolutionary organization to develop it will
probably be necessary to concentrate continuously on a particular
workplace or residential area, to develop an ongoing dialogue with
people you see continually.

Factory and office organizations can even begin gathering information
about their own workplace facilities and planning how these could be
seized, diverted and utilized in a revolutionary situation.

It is crucial that, at a very early stage these groups link up with each
other and begin sharing information and ideas, as well as whatever
material facilities they might have (literature, tools, media equipment,
etc.). This must not take place just regionally. Rather, we must link up
our activities with each other all over the world. This will be
especially crucial when revolts occur -- our strategy must be worldwide
and as revolution breaks out we must be already prepared to coordinate
our action internationally. Otherwise, each revolt will be crushed in
isolation.

Although such revolutionary organizations will sometimes be forced to
engage in limited day-to-day struggles for survival, we must not turn
these into "issues" to "organize around." We must, among
prerevolutionary proletarians, be completely explicit and open about our
views and aims -- that our desires can be realized only by the complete
and forcible overthrow of all exiting social conditions.

I have said nothing in this article that 99% of the readers didn't
already know intuitively. Communism is in our bones. It is the real and
highest form of human nature. In spite of all the authoritarian
conditioning, and the distortions, lies and confusion presented by the
media, these ideas are already in everyone's minds -- however deeply
they may be buried. It is now up to us and us only -- to take control of
our own lives.

The wall which must be knocked down is immense, but it has been cracked
so many times that soon a single cry will be enough to bring it crashing
to the ground. Let the formidable reality of the real communist movement
emerge at last from the mists of history, with all the individual
passions that have fuelled a thousand insurrections of the past. Soon we
shall find that there is an energy locked up in everyday life which can
move mountains and abolish distances.

Charles Lutwidge, October 1975

## Social Revolution afterword

We are reproducing "A Modest Proposal..." because as far as we know it
has become unavailable -- in this country at least. The article
describes some social and political perspectives which we generally
agree with: the alienation which pervades all social activity today,
even that of revolutionary groups; commodity production and its
destructive effects socially; the necessity of useless bureaucracy to a
system where profitable uselessness comes before unprofitable necessity;
the presence of "The Left" and their contribution to the perpetuation of
capitalism by encouraging trends towards the centralisation of control
in the hands of the state; how the communist movement showed itself in
the past, how it was crushed and how it has reappeared; the importance
of authoritarian conditioning; and an outline of how the Bad Old Days
might end.

[^01]: By "forces of production" I mean everything which serves to
    enhance our ability to reproduce ourselves and to enrich ourselves
    as human beings. This includes not only improvements in
    "technology," but also in organizational methods and our own skills,
    energy, creativity and imagination as well as our ability to realize
    these. Every student can see this contradiction when he/she finds
    that much of his/her activity consists of juggling "credits,"
    "grades" and "units," and waiting in line and hassling at the
    registrar's office -- and that the whole content of their
    "education" is subordinated to these silly things. At colleges and
    universities there is a gigantic administrative bureaucracy, the
    function of which has nothing to do with education as such, but is
    necessary so long as the principle function of such "educational
    institutions" is merely to prepare people for the senile job market,
    and for lives as helpless spectators in a world beyond their
    control.

[^02]: By a commodity I mean something which is produced primarily to be
    exchanged rather than for use as such. Its producer is interested
    not in the product itself, but in what he can get in exchange for it
    -- usually money which he can then exchange for other commodities.
    Thus it is not the particular qualities of a product, but rather its
    (exchange-)value which motivates production in a commodity economy.
    As capitalism develops, the primary motivation for production is to
    increase exchange-value, or its implicit form, value as much as
    possible. The particular qualities of the products (i.e., their
    capacity for use, including use for pleasure -- or as I call it,
    their use-value) become, at best, secondary. Anyone who has ever
    been on welfare or unemployment has had the experience of going to
    offices, spending hours being questioned and hassled, waiting in
    lines, filling out forms and going through countless other
    humiliations in order to receive some silly pieces of paper (checks)
    which are exchanged for other silly pieces of paper (cash) which can
    then be exchanged for various commodities. But the things you
    ultimately buy would be every bit as good if you simply took them.
    The entire paper world of the welfare bureaucracy is completely
    worthless. Not only the hours of humiliation which all welfare
    recipients have to spend to get their check, but furthermore
    absolutely every hour, day, year and second spent on the job by
    employees at the welfare bureaucracies are completely useless and
    unnecessary. It is completely wasted and unproductive labor which
    has nothing to do with the use-value of the goods which it is
    supposed to help people attain.

[^03]: Many times in past revolutions, such organizations -- which
    workers have created to coordinate revolts and in some cases to
    resume production under their own management -- have been called
    workers' councils.

[^04]: In fact we -- the proletariat -- are quite obviously the
    overwhelming majority of the people in the world today. Our class
    includes not only industrial "blue collar" workers, but furthermore,
    white collar and "service" workers (skilled and unskilled alike),
    teachers, unemployed, welfare recipients, most students,
    agricultural workers, and even a growing number of "professionals,"
    artists and musicians (in spite of all the illusions many of these
    people try to maintain) not to mention miscellaneous shitworkers of
    all sorts.

[^05]: I can remember now how in my earliest childhood I just assumed
    the world and my life were mine to play with, and how restraints and
    restrictions seemed so irrational and unnecessary. I remember how
    shocked I was when I found that everything I enjoyed was forbidden,
    every spontaneous act frustrated. When I was about four I had this
    idea that I was going to build a ship and go sailing with this girl
    I knew ... and we'd keep sailing till we came to some unknown island
    where we'd live outside and sleep in the sand till we built a big
    carnival city for all of our friends to come and live in ... but
    without any-parents and without any baby-sitters to boss us around
    because we'd know how to run the place. Of course, I never got to do
    any of those things, so continually I would just create microcosmic
    dreamworlds when there was nowhere else worth being. I remember even
    these being crushed until finally I stopped dreaming. For so long
    since, such dreams seemed silly and embarrassing. It's only quite
    recently that I've understood again how important they really were,
    how seriously they should be taken. I have only recently begun again
    to dream ... and hopefully with still more coherence.
