---
title: "Abstract Labour and Value in Marx's System"
author: Rubin, Isaak Illich
date: 1927
description: This version is based of the [marxists.org]() version, but an alternative can be found on [libcom.org](https://libcom.org/library/abstract-labour-value-marx%E2%80%99s-system-isaak-illich-rubin), or the [scanned article](https://rosswolfe.files.wordpress.com/2017/03/isaak-rubin-value-and-abstract-labor-1927.pdf) by _Capital and Class_, which seems to be what marxists.org based their article on.
...

# Introductory notes by _Capital and Class_

We publish below an English translation of a lecture given at a meeting
of the General Economics Section of the Institute for Economics, Moscow,
by I.I. Rubin in May and June 1927. The corrected transcription was
first published in _Under the Banner of Marxism._ This translation has
been made from the German, I.I. Rubin, S.A. Bessonov et al: _Dialektik
der Kategorien: Debatte in der UdSSR_ (1927-29) (VSA, West Berlin,
1975).

The lecture develops one of the main themes of Rubin's _Essays on
Marx_'s _Theory of Value,_ thus providing a useful introduction to the
latter work, while developing beyond it in important respects. The
lecture aims to bring out more clearly than had the _Essays_ the
distinction between the _social commensurability of labour_ that is
characteristic of any society that is based on the division of labour,
and the specific form in which this commensuration is achieved in
capitalist society, the form of _abstract labour._ The lecture thus
centres on a further investigation of the concept of the _form of value_
and brings out particularly clearly the significance of the distinctions
between value and exchange value, and between abstract and embodied
labour, as well as contributing to the debate about the methodology of
_Capital._ At the time the lecture was given these issues were of the
greatest political significance, for in the period of the NEP, when
Rubin's influence was at its greatest, the question of the applicability
of the "law of value" under socialism, and so the proper understanding
of the concept of value, was of the utmost importance to the future
development of the Soviet Union. Despite the already intensifying
repression it was therefore still possible to examine the foundations of
Marxism. With the abandonment of the NEP and the switch to the 'general
line' such critical examination became increasingly intolerable for the
Soviet state as heterodoxy in theory came to be identified with economic
sabotage and foreign intervention in the subversion of established state
policy. Thus, Rubin, along with other leading Marxist theorists whose
works have recently been rediscovered (like Pashukanis and Volosinov)
fell victim to the purges of the 1930s.

Biographical note: Isaac Il'ich Rubin was born in 1896. He joined the
Bund in 1904 and became a member of its Central Committee. He later
joined the Mensheviks and was elected to their Central Committee in the
autumn of 1920. Trained originally as a lawyer, his handbooks on
conciliation and arbitration and on unemployment insurance were
published by the Moscow Soviet in 1917-18. He was imprisoned by the GPU
in 1923-4 in the round-up of Mensheviks. On his release he dropped his
political work to concentrate on his academic studies and teaching. From
1926-30 he was a Research Associate at the Marx-Engels Institute under
Ryazanov, to whom he was very close, becoming one of the most
influential interpreters of Marx's work. During this period he published
several books: _Contemporary Economists in the West; Classics of
Political Economy from the 17th to mid-19th centuries; A History of
Economic Thought; History of Class Struggles; Essays on Marx_'s _Theory
of Value, and co-edited Fundamental Problems of Political Economy._

Rubin's former association with Menshevism led to his arrest in December
1930 and his inclusion in the Menshevik trial of March 1931, in which he
was accused of collaboration with a supposed "Union Bureau of the
Central Committee of the RSDRP" financed and directed from abroad. The
charges were ludicrous, and the evidence internally contradictory and in
a number of instances clearly false. However Rubin, like the other
accused, made a full confession of his "guilt," a confession extracted
by the use of sustained and extreme torture (see Medvedev, pp.132-6).
The trial was designed as an object lesson to the Bolshevik right
opposition and to the Trotskyists. Rubin was included in order to
incriminate Ryazanov, who was sacked and expelled from the party as a
result of Rubin's "confession" "for treason to the Party and direct aid
to the Menshevik interventionists." In anticipation of his trial Rubin
was denounced in _Bolshevik,_ 2, 1930 by V. Milyutin and D. Bovilin as
follows: "I.I. Rubin is the ideologist and representative of the
ideology of the theoreticians of the Second International in Political
Economy\... It is a great error to describe I.I. Rubin as a fighter for
orthodox Marxism against the 'social school', or to accept uncritically
and with negligible reservations a number of his theoretical assertions
as strictly Marxist." To the article was appended a statement announcing
the complete cessation of press discussion of the views of Rubin and his
followers. However it proved necessary to publish further diatribes by
Bovilin in _Pravda_ in its issues of 13/1/31 and 7/3/31, the first
called "Let us tear out _Rubinschina_ by the roots."

Rubin was sentenced to five years in jail. After three years in solitary
confinement he was exiled to Turgai and then to Aktiubinsk, where he
worked as a plan economist in the consumer cooperative and continued his
own work. Arrested again in 1937 Rubin was transferred from Aktiubinsk
and disappeared for good. As a recent Soviet philosopher, Rosenthal, has
observed: "The Communist Party has destroyed this tendency, which is
quite alien to Marxism, and assisted Soviet philosophers and economists
to unmask its essence" (quoted Rosdolsky, p.570n). We are very pleased
to publish Rubin's "mischief" (ibid) here.

---

# I

Comrades, I have chosen abstract labour and value as the theme of my
lecture for two reasons: firstly, I know that the question of abstract
labour and the form and content of value has been the subject of heated
debate in your seminars. Because of this I decided to organize my
lecture in such a way that I may deal with the problem of abstract
labour in detail, while covering the question of value, its form and
content at the same time.

The second reason which persuaded me to select this theme is that it is
the central problem of all Marxist theory. We do not term the theory
'the labour theory of value' for nothing -- the name alone indicates
that the main problem of the theory is the question of the reciprocal
relationship between labour and value. What is the labour which creates
or determines value, and what is the value which is created or
determined by labour? That is the main problem of Marxist theory, which
I hope to illuminate in my lecture.

Before we move to the essential part of the question, I should like to
make a few remarks on methodology. By what method do we intend to set
about solving this problem? In the Introduction to a Critique of
Political Economy (Introduction to the Grundrisse) Marx observed that an
economic investigation can be conducted according to two methods: by the
transition from the concrete to the abstract, and conversely by movement
from the abstract to the concrete.

The former, the analytical method, consists in taking a complex concrete
phenomenon as the starting point of the investigation, and selecting a
single, or several of the most important, characteristics, disregarding
the multiplicity of its features, and so making the transition from the
more concrete to the more abstract concept, to the simpler, or thinner
concept, as Marx says. By further analysis we move on from this concept
to an even simpler one, until we have reached the most abstract concepts
in the particular science or the particular complex of questions, which
interest us.

To cite just one example as an illustration of the problematic we are
dealing with, I may remind you of the reciprocal relation between the
following concepts. The Marxian theory of value builds on the concepts:
abstract labour, value, exchange value and money. If we take money, the
most complex and most concrete aspect of these concepts, and by
examining the concept of money make the transition to exchange value, as
the more general concept underlying money; if we then move from exchange
value to value, and from value to abstract labour, we are moving from
the more concrete to the more abstract concept, i.e. we are following
the analytical method.

But, Marx says, however necessary the use of the analytical method is in
the first stage of scientific enquiry, it cannot satisfy us in itself,
and it must be complemented by another method. Once we have traced the
complex phenomenon back to its basic elements by means of analysis, we
have to take the opposite direction and, starting from the most abstract
concepts, show how these develop to lead us on to more concrete forms,
more concrete concepts. In our case, this progression from the simpler
concepts to richer and more complex ones would be the movement from
abstract labour to value, from value to exchange value and from exchange
value to money.

Marx calls this method 'genetic', at one point, because it enables us to
follow the genesis and development of complex forms. Elsewhere he terms
it the dialectical. I hope we can also agree to describe the first
method as the analytical, and the second (which includes both the
analytical and the synthetic method) as dialectical.

Marx indicates that he considers the dialectical method to be the only
one which solves scientific questions satisfactorily. Accordingly, we
have to subject the problem which interests us, the question of the
relationship between labour and value, to investigation not only by the
analytical method, but by the dialectical as well.

Marx gives many examples to show in what respect the analytic method is
inadequate. I should like to quote three examples here.

Concerning the theory of value, Marx says "Political economy has indeed
analysed, however incompletely, value and its magnitude, and has
discovered what lies beneath these forms. But it has never once asked
the question why labour is represented by the value of its product and
labour time by the magnitude of that value." (_Capital I_ p.80).

In another passage, devoted to the theory of money, Marx says: "In the
last decades of the 17th century it had already been shown that money is
a commodity, but this step marks only the infancy of the analysis. The
difficulty lies, not in comprehending that money is a commodity, but in
discovering how, why and by what means a commodity becomes money."
(_Capital I_ p.92) Here, as we see, the dialectical method differs once
again from the analytical.

Finally, at a further point while discussing religion, Marx repeats the
idea which he has stated before, that it is obviously much easier to
discover by analysis the core of the curious religious conceptions, than
conversely, it is to develop from the actual relations of real life the
corresponding forms of those relations. The latter method is the only
materialistic and consequently the only scientific one (_Capital I_
p.372 note 3).

Following Marx, we must solve our problem in this way. Our task does not
only consist in showing that the value of a product can be attributed to
labour. We must also show the converse. We must reveal how people's
productive relations find their expression in value.

This is the basic statement of the problem, which must be considered the
most methodologically correct from the Marxian standpoint.

If we put the question in this way, we take not the concept of value as
the starting point of the investigation, but the concept of labour. We
define the concept of labour in such a way that the concept of value
also follows from it.

The requirements of the methodology already give us some indications as
to the correct definition of the concept of labour.

The concept of labour must be defined in such a way that it comprises
all the characteristics of the social organisation of labour,
characteristics which give rise to the form of value, which is
appropriate to the products of labour. A concept of labour from which
the concept of value does not follow, and particularly a concept of
labour in the physiological sense, i.e. the concept of labour which
lacks all the features which are characteristic of its social
organisation in commodity production, cannot lead to the conclusion
which we seek from the Marxian standpoint of the dialectical method.

In the following I shall try to show that the difference in conception
between the sociological and the physiological understanding of abstract
labour can in part be explained precisely by the distinction between the
two methods, the dialectical and the analytical. Although the
physiological conception of abstract labour can stand its ground more or
less successfully from the standpoint of the analytical method,
nevertheless it is doomed to failure from the start from the standpoint
of the dialectical, since one cannot obtain from the concept of labour
in the physiological sense any notion of value as the necessary social
form of the product of labour.

So we have to define labour in such a way that from it, from labour and
its social organisation, we may understand the necessity of value as the
basic social form which the products of labour assume in commodity
production and the laws of the movement of value.

Moving on to the analysis of labour, we will start with the most simple
concept, with the concept of concrete or useful labour.

Concrete labour is seen by Marx as labour in its useful activity, as
labour which creates products which are necessary for the satisfaction
of human needs. Labour viewed from this material technical side
represents concrete labour.

It is obvious that concrete labour does not interest us in the least, so
long as we are speaking of the individual, of Robinson Crusoe overcoming
nature, since the object of our science is not the production of a
single individual, but social production, the production of a whole
group of people which is organized on the basis of a specific social
division of labour. The system of the social division of labour is the
totality of the various concrete kinds of labour, which are unified in a
determined system and complement one another materially.

So we have made the transition from concrete labour in general to the
system of the social division of labour, as the totality of the various
concrete kinds of labour. We have to inquire more closely into the
concept of the social division of labour since it plays a key role in
the understanding of the whole of Marx's theory of value.

Marx says that the system of the social division of labour can occur in
two-fold form -- as he terms it -- as a system which is mediated
through exchange and as a system which has no need of such mediation,
for example the natural economy of a large clan or of a socialist
community etc.

We may look first at the system of organized social division of labour
which has developed without exchange.

So long as one speaks of an organized system of the social division of
labour, we have not only concrete material-technical labour, but social
labour as well. In Marx, the concept of the social division of labour is
on the border between the concept of concrete useful labour, and social
labour in social production. On the one hand, at the beginning of the
section on the two-fold character of labour (_Capital I_ p.41 f), Marx
examines the social division of labour as the totality of the concrete
modes of labour. Elsewhere in Capital, particularly in the chapter on
"Manufacture," (_Capital I_ p.350ff), he examines the system of the
social division of labour from the standpoint of the human relations of
production which characterize this system. In organized production, the
relations among people are relatively simple and transparent. Labour
assumes a directly social form, i.e. there is a determined social
organization and determined social organs, which distribute the labour
among the individual members of the society, whereby the labour of each
person enters directly into social production as concrete labour with
all its concrete material characteristics. The labour of each person is
social, specifically because it differs from the labour of the other
members of the society and represents a material complement to them.
Labour is directly social in its concrete form. At the same time it is
also divided labour. For the social organization of labour consists in
labour being distributed among the individual members of the society,
and conversely the division of labour being the act of a social organ.
Labour is both social and divided, and possesses these characteristics
in its material technical, concrete or useful form also.

Let us now ask this question: is the labour in an organised community
also socially equated? Do we find a process which we could describe as a
social process of equation of labour in this community?

There are various views on this particular problem. Some economists
maintain that this kind of social equation of labour already exists in
any production community, which is based on the division of labour, and
in a form which does not differ in essence from the equation of labour
in commodity production.

Other economists take the opposite view, saying that the process of
social equation of labour is a process which is only appropriate to
commodity production and occurs in no other form of production. In
particular, these economists deny the possibility and necessity for
social equation of labour in a socialist economy.

I have suggested a middle road in my book. I pointed out that every
production which rests on the division of labour has recourse to social
equation of the labour of different kinds and different individuals, to
some extent and in one form or another. I also pointed out in connection
with this that this equation of labour acquires a very particular social
form in commodity production and therefore makes way for the appearance
of a completely new category, that of abstract labour. I think that Marx
regarded the question in this way, although we have no clear statement
by him on the subject. I know of one very explicit observation, which
dates already from the first edition of 'Capital'. There he says: "In
every social form of labour the labours of the various individuals are
related to each other also as human labours but here _this relation
itself_ counts as the _specifically social form_ of the labours" (_Das
Kapital,_ 1st edition p.238).

We will analyse the end of this sentence at a later point. For the
present, I only want to establish that Marx clearly thought that in
every social form of labour, the labour of single individuals is related
as human labour. It is correct that extreme adherents of the
physiological version could maintain that Marx meant here only the
physiological equality of the various kinds of labour. But this
interpretation seems to me too far-fetched. Both the actual sense of the
particular sentence, which speaks of the "social form of labour," as
well as its relation to many other places in Capital, indicate that Marx
meant here the process of social equation of labour.

I think it is necessary to add a certain qualification to the formula
that social equation of labour occurs in any social form of production.

I think that in the ancient family, for instance, where the labour was
divided between man and woman and was tied to the representative of each
sex, where the change from male labour to female did not exist and was
even forbidden, the process of social equation of labour could not take
place, even in embryonic form. Further, in social organizations which
were based on extreme inequality of the various social strata (e.g.
slavery), the social equation of labour could only occur for the members
of a specific social group (e.g. for slaves or for a specific category
of slaves). Even the concept of labour as such, as social function,
could not be acquired in this kind of society.

If we then leave aside social organization which was based on extreme
inequality of the sexes or of individual groups, and turn to a large
community with division of labour, e.g. the kind found in the large
family associations of the Southern Slavs -- I think that here the
process of social equation of labour was necessary. It becomes all the
more necessary in a large socialist community. But this process of the
equation of labour in an organized community differs essentially from
the process which occurs in commodity production. Let us actually
imagine some socialist community where labour is distributed among the
members of the society. A determined social organ equates the labour of
different kinds and of different individuals, since without this organ
there could be no economic planning. But in a community of this kind the
process of equation of labour is secondary and only complementary to the
process of socialization and division of labour. Labour is primarily
social and divided. The characteristic of socially equalized labour
belongs here as derivative or supplementary. The main characteristic of
labour is its social and divided aspect and its socially equated aspect
is an additional feature.

I may take this opportunity to say that for the sake of clarity I would
find it useful to distinguish between three concepts of equal labour:

1) physiologically equal labour
2) socially equated labour
3) abstract labour, as used by Marx, or preferably, abstract universal
	labour (a term which Marx uses in the 'Critique')

The physiological homogeneity of the various modes of labour existed in
all historical epochs, and the possibility that individuals may change
over from one occupation to another is the prerequisite for any social
division of labour. Socially equated labour is characteristic for all
systems with the social division of labour, that is not only for
commodity production, but, for instance, for a socialist community.
Finally the third concept of labour, as abstract universal, is
characteristic only for commodity production. We will come onto this
concept. So far we have only discussed the second concept of labour as
socially equated and divided.

Let us take a look at the changes which will take place in the
organization of labour in our community, if we imagine it not in the
form of an organised whole, but in the form of a combination of
individual production units of private commodity producers, that is, in
the form of commodity production.

In commodity production we also find the social characteristics of
labour, specified above, which we observed earlier in an organised
community. Here too we will find social labour, divided labour and
socially equated labour; but all these socialisation processes,
processes of equation and division of labour, occur in a totally
different form. The interrelation between the three characteristics is
now completely different, primarily because in commodity production the
direct social organization of labour is missing, and labour is not
directly social.

In commodity production, the labour of an individual, a single commodity
producer, is not directly regulated by the society, and in itself, in
its concrete form, it does not yet belong to social production. Labour
only becomes social in commodity production when it assumes the
characteristic of socially equated labour; the labour of every commodity
producer only becomes social by virtue of the fact that his product is
assimilated with the products of all the other commodity producers, and
the labour of a specific individual is thus assimilated with the labour
of all the other members of the society and all the others kinds of
labour. There is no other characteristic for the definition of the
social character of labour in commodity production. There is no
previously conceived plan for the socialisation of the division of
labour, and the only indication that the labour of a particular
individual is included within the social system of production is the
exchange of the product of a specific labour for any other product.

So in comparison with the socialist community, the characteristics of
social labour and of equated labour have exchanged roles in commodity
production. Previously, the characteristic labour as equal or equated
was the result of the secondary process, of the derived act of a social
organ, which socialised and distributed labour. Now labour only becomes
social in the form in which it is equated with all other kinds of
labour, and becomes thus socially equated labour.

I should like to quote a few statements by Marx which should confirm
this.

The most unequivocal example can be found in the 'Critique' where Marx
says that labour only becomes social "by assuming the form of its direct
opposite, of abstract universal labour" (p.34), that is, the form of
equation with all other kinds of labour. "Abstract and in that form
social labour" -- Marx frequently characterises the social form of
labour in commodity production with these words. I may also call to mind
the well known passage from 'Capital' which states that in commodity
production "the specific social character of private labour carried on
independently, consists in the equality of every kind of that labour by
virtue of its being human labour" (_Capital I_ p.74).

And so in commodity production the emphasis of the social characteristic
of labour shifts from the attribute of socialised labour to that of
equal or socially equated labour, which only becomes socially equalised
labour through the equation of the products of labour. The concept of
the equality of labour plays an important role in Marxian value theory
precisely because in commodity production labour becomes social only in
its quality of being equal labour.

Like the characteristic of social labour the characteristic of divided
labour also follows from the equality of labour in commodity production.
The division of labour in commodity production does not consist in its
conscious distribution corresponding to determined, previously expressed
needs, but is regulated by the principle of the equal advantage of
production. The division of labour between individual branches of
production takes place in such a way that in all branches of production,
the commodity producers receive an equal sum of value through
expenditure of an equal quantity of labour.

We established the three characteristics of labour as being social
labour, socially equated labour and divided labour. All these
characteristics also appertain to labour in a socialist society, but
completely change their character and their interrelationship as
compared with commodity production. The three characteristics of labour
which we listed here are the basis from which the three aspects of value
develop. Marx considers value as the unity of the form of value, the
substance of value and the magnitude of value. "The crucially important
task however was to discover the inner necessary interrelationship
between the _form_ of value, the _substance_ of value and the
_magnitude_ of value" (_Kapital 1st ed._ p.240). The unity of the form,
substance and magnitude of value reflects the unity of labour as social,
socially equated and quantitatively divided. In commodity production,
the relations of labour and of production are "objectified" and the
social characteristics of labour assume the form of "objectified"
attributes of the product of labour. The "form of value" is the social
form of the product of labour, which reflects the particular social
character of labour in commodity production. "The substance of value"
represents socially equal labour. And finally the "magnitude of value"
is the expression of the social division of labour, or more precisely of
the quantitative side of the process of division of labour.

The threefold character of labour, which we have suggested, helps us to
explain the relationship which exists in the Marxian system between
form, substance, and magnitude of value. In particular this division
clarifies some problems of the construction of Marx's section on the
'Fetishism of Commodities'.

Allow me to read out this section from the second paragraph: "For, in
the first place, however varied the useful kinds of labour or productive
activities, may be, it is a physiological fact that they are functions
of the human organization, and each such function, whatever may be its
nature or form, is essentially the expenditure of human brain, nerves,
muscles etc. Secondly, with regard to that which forms the ground-work
for the quantitative determination of value, namely, the duration of
that expenditure or the quantity of labour, it is quite clear that there
is a palpable difference between its quantity and quality. Lastly, from
the moment that men in any way work for one another, their labour
assumes a social form" (_Capital I_ p.71).

In the three points quoted, Marx indicates that we can observe the three
characteristics of labour, social, equal and quantitatively divided, not
only in commodity production, but also in other forms of production.

But, says Marx, "whence, then arises the enigmatical character of the
product of labour, so soon as it assumes the form of commodities?" And
he answers himself: obviously precisely from the form of commodities, in
which the three characteristics of labour are already transformed,
"reified," in the value of the products of labour. "The equality of all
sorts of human labour is expressed objectively by their products all
being equally values; the measure of the expenditure of human labour
power by the duration of that expenditure, takes the form of the
quantity of value of the products of labour; and finally, the mutual
relations of the producers, within which the social character affirms
itself, takes the form of a social relation between the products."
(_Capital I_ p.72)

In these three points Marx already speaks of the substance, the
magnitude and the form of value. His reasoning can be traced
particularly clearly in the first edition of 'Capital', where the three
sentences quoted are immediately followed by a whole page on the
substance, magnitude and form of value. In the second edition the
comments referring to the substance, magnitude and form of value are
apparently omitted by Marx. In reality they were only deferred. The
three paragraphs which precede the analysis of the various forms of
production (Robinson's production, medieval production etc.) are devoted
to the substance, the magnitude and the form of value[^1].

We have now reached the conclusion that equal labour can mean firstly
physiologically equal labour, which we have only briefly considered;
secondly it can signify socially equated labour, and this kind of labour
exists not only in commodity production, but also, let us say in a
_socialist community or another large community which is based on the_
social division of labour; and finally there is abstract universal
labour, that is, socially equated labour in the specific form
appropriate to commodity production, labour which becomes social and
divided only by the process of social equation. Only this socially
equated labour can be described as abstract or abstract-universal. We
should mention here that Marx makes several allusions to the three kinds
of equation of labour in the 'Critique of Political Economy', that is to
physiological, social equalisation in general and social equalisation in
commodity production. Marx does not draw any absolutely clear
distinction it is true, but we should point out that he does distinguish
three terms: human labour, equal and abstract universal labour. I would
not maintain that these three terms coincide with those which we
characterised earlier as physiologically equal labour, socially
equalised and abstract labour, but there are some points of contact
nevertheless.

In dealing with the problem of abstract labour, we cannot therefore stop
at the preliminary characteristic of labour as physiologically equal,
nor the characteristic of labour as socially equated. We have to make
the transition from both these characteristics to a third, and
investigate that specific form of equated labour which is peculiar to
commodity production, that is, the system of the social division of
labour based on exchange.

Consequently, not only are the followers of the physiological conception
of abstract labour mistaken in our opinion, but also those comrades who
understand abstract labour in general to mean socially equated labour
independent of the specific social form in which this equation occurs.

We must add, that the two concepts of labour, physiologically equated
and socially equated, are frequently confused, and not distinguished
from one another sufficiently clearly. The concept of abstract universal
labour naturally implies the physiological equality and the social
equation of labour, but apart from these it also contains the social
equation of labour in the quite specific form which it takes in
commodity production.

We could give many quotations from Marx himself to show how he is
crudely misconstrued by the followers of the physiological conception of
abstract labour. I should like to read just one very characteristic
quotation here. In his short sketch of Franklin's views Marx says that
Franklin unconsciously reduced all the forms of labour to one aspect,
being uninterested in whether the labour was that of a shoemaker, a
tailor, etc. Franklin believed that value is determined "by abstract
labour, which has no particular quality and can thus be measured only in
terms of quantity." Franklin recognised abstract labour. "But," Marx
added, "since he does not explain that the labour expressed in exchange
value is abstract universal social labour, which is brought about by the
universal alienation of individual labour, he is bound to mistake money
for the direct embodiment of this alienated labour." (_Critique_
p.56-57).

It is obvious here that Marx is contrasting abstract labour with
abstract universal labour. The abstract universal labour which is
embodied in value is the labour which is specifically appropriate to
commodity production.

We now reach the conclusion: that if we analyse the problem of the
relation between labour and value from the standpoint of the dialectical
method as well as the analytical, then we must take the concept of
labour as the starting point and develop the concept of value from it.

If we follow the analytical method, start out from value and ask
ourselves what lies beneath this concept, we can certainly say that
physiologically equal labour and socially equated labour are concealed
beneath the value of products. But neither answer will be adequate,
since there is no way to make the transition from physiologically equal
labour or from socially equated labour to value.

In order to arrive at the concept of value dialectically from the
concept of labour, we must also include in the concept of labour those
features which characterise the social organization of labour in
commodity production and necessitate the appearance of value as the
particular social form of the product of labour. Consequently this
concept of abstract universal labour must be far richer than both the
concept of the physiological equality of labour and the concept of the
social equation of labour in general.

# II

We moved from physiologically equal labour to socially equated labour,
and from socially equated to abstract universal labour. We enriched our
definition of labour by new characteristics in the three stages of our
investigation and only when we moved on to the third stage and defined
labour as abstract universal, from which the category of value must
necessarily follow, was it possible for us to move from labour to value.

We could define abstract labour approximately as follows:

Abstract labour is the designation for that part of the total social
labour which was equalised in the process of social division of labour
through the equation of the products of labour on the market.

In my book 'Essays on Marx's Theory of Value' I gave more or less this
definition. I think it is necessary to add that the social nature of
abstract labour is not limited by the fact that the concept of value
necessarily follows from this concept. As I have already outlined in my
book, the concept of abstract labour leads unconditionally to the
concept of money also, and from the Marxian standpoint that is entirely
consistent. In reality we defined abstract labour as labour which was
made equal through the all round equation of all the products of labour,
but the equation of all the products of labour is not possible except
through the assimilation of each one of them with a universal
equivalent. Consequently the product of abstract labour has the ability
to be assimilated with all the other products only in the form that it
appears as universal equivalent or can potentially be exchanged for a
universal equivalent.

One can see particularly clearly in the 'Critique of Political Economy'
that the concept of abstract labour is inseparably tied to that of the
universal equivalent for Marx.

There Marx approaches the study of abstract labour as follows. As in
'Capital', he starts out from the commodity or value, and uncovers
analytically the abstract universal labour which lies beneath value
(Studienausgabe p.235). After he has moved by analysis from the equality
of values to the equality of labour he goes on to a detailed
sociological characterisation of this equal labour, of the "social
categories of labour," "social \... in the particular sense" which is
appropriate to commodity production. (_Critique_ p.31). In commodity
production the social character of labour is expressed by "the labour of
the individual assuming the abstract form of universal labour, or his
product assuming the form _of universal equivalent:_ (_Critique_
p.33-34). "The universal labour-time finds its expression in a universal
product, a universal equivalent." (_Critique_ p.32). "The labour of an
individual can produce exchange value only if it produces _universal
equivalents_" (_Critique_ p.32).

As we can see, Marx links the category of abstract labour inseparably
with the concept of the universal equivalent, or money. We therefore
have to carry the social characterisation of abstract labour still
further and deeper, and not confine ourselves to the assimilation of
labour through the equation of its products. We must add that labour
becomes abstract through being assimilated with a particular form of
labour, or through the assimilation of its product with a universal
equivalent, which was therefore regarded by Marx as the objectification
or materialisation of abstract labour.

From this standpoint, an interesting parallel between Marx and Hegel
opens up here. The term 'abstract universal' itself, as we know, is
reminiscent of Hegel, who distinguishes the abstract universal from the
concrete universal. The distinction between the two can be reduced to
the fact that the concrete universal does not exclude the differences
between the objects which are included within this universal aspect,
while the abstract universal excludes such differences.

In order to understand why Marx describes the equated labour of
commodity producers as the abstract universal, we have to compare the
process of equation of labour in a socialist community with the process
of equation of labour in commodity production. We will notice the
following distinction. Let us assume that some organ compares the
various kinds of labour one with another in a socialist community. What
happens here? This organ takes all these kinds of labour in their
concrete useful form, since it links them in precisely this form, but it
abstracts one of their aspects and says that these kinds of labour are
equal to each other in the given circumstances. In this case the
equality appears as a characteristic of these concrete kinds of labour,
as a characteristic which was abstracted from these forms; but this
universal category of equality does not destroy their concrete
difference, which manifests itself as useful labour.

In commodity production comparison of this kind is impossible, since
there is no organ which consciously equates all these kinds of labour.
The labour of a spinner and that of a weaver cannot be equated, so long
as they are concrete useful labour. Their equation results only
indirectly through the assimilation of each with the third form of
labour, namely 'abstract universal' labour (cf. _Critique_). This
determined kind of labour is 'abstract universal' (and not concrete
universal) precisely because it does not include the distinctions
between the various concrete kinds of labour but precludes these
divergences: this kind poses all the concrete kinds of labour in that it
appears as their representative.

The fact that in this case Marx intended the distinction between the
abstract universal and the concrete universal, which occurs in Hegel,
can be seen clearly in the first edition of 'Capital' where in general
the traces of Hegelian concepts and Hegelian terminology stand out far
more distinctly than in the second. Here there is a paragraph which
reads:

> Within the value-relation and the value expression included in it, the
> abstractly general accounts not as a property of the concrete,
> sensibly real; but on the contrary the sensibly-concrete counts as the
> mere form of appearance or definite form of realisation of the
> abstractly general \... This inversion, by which the sensibly-concrete
> counts only as the form of appearance of the abstractly general and
> not, on the contrary, the abstractly general as property of the
> concrete, characterises the expression of value. At the same time, it
> makes understanding it difficult. (_The Value Form,_ pp.39-140).

At another point Marx says:

> It is as if together with and besides lions, tigers, hares and all the
> other real animals, which as a group form the various genuses,
> species, subspecies, families etc of the animal kingdom, there also
> existed the Animal, the individual incarnation of the whole animal
> kingdom. (_Kapital 1_st ed. p.234).

To decipher this statement by Marx, we must say that in commodity
production the abstract universal really appears not as characteristic
or attribute of the concrete, the sensuous-real (i.e. of the concrete
modes of labour), since in order to abstract the specific universal
features from these concrete modes of labour, it would need a unified
organ, which does not exist in commodity production. The concrete kinds
of labour are therefore not assimilated one with another through
abstraction of some universal characteristics, but through comparison
and equation of each of these kinds with a particular determined
concrete kind which serves as phenomenal form of universal labour. In
order that concrete labour becomes universal, universal labour must
appear in the form of concrete labour, "if the individual's labour time
represents universal labour time, or if universal labour time represents
individual labour time" (_Critique_ p.32).

It is only in the light of these comments by Marx, which show clear
traces of Hegel's influence, that we can understand the passages from
the Critique which we mentioned earlier, in which Marx says that labour
only becomes social in commodity production by assuming the form of
abstract universality.

This idea is generally related to Marx's views on bourgeois society. In
his earlier works, in the 'German Ideology' for example, he expresses
the idea that in bourgeois society, where a central social organization
of production is lacking, the representation of the social interest
always falls to some single organization, to a group of people, to a
single class. This single social class declares its partial interests to
be the interests of the whole society and lends its ideas 'the form of
universality'. The particular interest is expressed as the general
interest and the general as the dominant (German Ideology, I. Collected
Works Vol. V p.60). If we compare these remarks by Marx in the Critique
with those statements where he says that social labour assumes "the
abstract form of universality" and that the value of a commodity assumes
the form of a particular determined commodity, the form of money, then
the close ideal relationship of these concepts becomes evident.

To conclude the problem of abstract labour, I must take up two
criticisms, which have been made against me, in the article by
Daschkowski[^2], and by various other comrades.

The first criticism was that I apparently seek to substitute for
abstract labour the process of abstraction from the concrete
characteristic attributes of labour, that is, that I seek to replace
abstract labour with the social form of the organization of labour.

Admittedly, a substitution of this kind, if it had really occurred,
would deviate from Marxist theory. But we maintain that the character of
people's relations of production in commodity production unconditionally
means that labour, both in its qualitative and its quantitative aspect,
finds its expression in value and in the magnitude of value of a
commodity. If instead of abstract labour we take only the social form of
the organization of labour, it would only help us to explain the 'form
of value', i.e. the social form, which a product of labour assumes. We
could also explain why a product of labour assumes the form of a
commodity which possesses a value. But we would not know why this
product assumes this given quantitatively determined value in
particular. In order to explain value as the unity of the form of value,
the substance of value and the magnitude of value, we have to start out
from abstract labour, which is not only social, and socially equated but
also quantitatively divided.

One can find formulations in Marx himself, which, if one chose, would be
sufficient reason to say that Marx substituted the social form of labour
for labour itself. Since it would be tedious to refer to the various
points in Marx, I should just like to mention one passage which, if
written by anyone but Marx, would sound heretical. The sentence runs:
"The labour which posits exchange value is a specific social form of
labour" (_Critique_ p.36). In the same place Marx says in a footnote
that value is the social form of wealth. If one combines these two
statements, then instead of the thesis that labour creates value, we
have the thesis that the social form of labour produces the social form
of wealth. Some critic would well say that Marx replaces labour
completely with the social form of labour: which Marx obviously did not
intend.

I should now like to turn to the second criticism. It has been said that
my explanations give rise to the impression that abstract labour is only
produced in the act of exchange. One could conclude from this that value
also is only created in exchange, whereas from Marx's standpoint, value
and consequently abstract labour too must already exist in the process
of production. This touches on the profound and critical problem of the
relations between production and exchange. How can we resolve this
difficulty? On the one hand value and abstract labour must already exist
in the process of production, and on the other hand Marx says in dozens
of places that the process of exchange is the precondition for abstract
labour.

Allow me to quote a few examples. I should like to come back to
Franklin. Marx says: "But since he does not explain that the labour
contained in exchange value is abstract universal social labour, which
is brought about by the universal alienation of individual labour \..."
etc. (_Critique_ p.56). Franklin's main mistake consequently was that
he disregarded the fact that abstract labour arises from the alienation
of individual labour.

This is not a question of an isolated comment by Marx. We will show that
in the later editions of 'Capital', Marx increasingly stressed the idea
that in commodity production only exchange reduces concrete labour to
abstract labour.

To return to our earlier comments: "Hence when we bring the products of
our labour into relation with each other as values, it is not because we
see in these articles the material receptacles of homogeneous human
labour. Quite the contrary: whenever, by an exchange we equate as values
our different products, by that very act, we also equate as human
labour, the different kinds of labour expended upon them." (_Capital I_
p.74).

In the first edition of 'Capital' this sentence had a completely
opposite meaning. Marx wrote: "When we bring our products into relation
with each other _as values_ to the extent that we see these articles
_only_ as _material receptacles_ of homogenous human labour \..." etc.
(p.242).

In the second edition Marx altered the sense of this sentence
completely, fearing that he would be understood to mean that we
consciously assimilate our labour as abstract labour in advance, and he
emphasised the aspect that the equation of labour as abstract labour
only occurs through the exchange of the products of labour. This is a
significant change between the first edition and the second. As you will
know, Marx did not confine himself to the second edition of the first
volume of 'Capital'. He corrected the text subsequently for the French
edition of 1875, and wrote that he was making corrections which he was
not able to make in the second German edition. On this basis he assigned
to the French edition of 'Capital', an independent scientific value
equal to the German original. (cf. _Capital I_ p.22).

In the second edition of 'Capital', we find the famous phrase:

> The equalisation of the most different kinds of labour can be the
> result only of an abstraction from their inequalities, or of reducing
> them to their common denominator viz. expenditure of human labour
> power or human labour in the abstract (cf. _Kapital_ p.87)

In the French edition Marx replaces the full stop at the end of this
sentence with a comma and adds "\... and only exchange produces this
reduction, by bringing the products of the most diverse kinds of labour
into relation with each other on an equal footing" (_Le Capital I_
p.70).

This insertion is highly indicative and shows clearly how far removed
Marx was from the physiological conception of abstract labour. How can
we reconcile these observations by Marx, of which there are dozens, with
the basic thesis that value is created in production?

This should not be too difficult. The point is that the comrades who
discussed the problem of the relationship between exchange and
production did not in my view distinguish sufficiently clearly between
the two concepts of exchange. We have to distinguish exchange as social
form of the reproduction process from exchange as a particular phase of
this reproduction process, which alternates with the phase of direct
production.

At first glance, exchange seems to be a separate phase in the process of
reproduction. We can see that a process first takes place in direct
production and is then followed by the phase of exchange. Here, exchange
is separate from production, and counterposed to it. But exchange is not
only a separate phase in the process of reproduction, it stamps the
whole process of reproduction with its specific mark and represents a
particular social form of the social process of production. Production
based on private exchange: Marx frequently characterised commodity
production with these words.

To make this point clearer, I will quote Marx's words from the third
volume of the 'Theories of Surplus Value' that "Exchange of products as
commodities is a method of exchanging labour, \[it demonstrates\] the
dependence of the labour of each upon the labour of the others, \[and
corresponds to\] a certain mode of social labour or social production"
(_Theories of Surplus Value_ vol. 3 p.129). Here too we find a
statement which explains why Marx regarded exchange as a social form of
labour:

> The whole economic structure of society revolves round the _form of
> labour,_ in other words, the form in which the worker appropriates his
> means of subsistence. (_Theories of Surplus Value_ p.414)

Let us ask now in exactly what form the labourer acquires his means of
subsistence in commodity production. We repeatedly find the following
answer to this question in Marx: In commodity production the only form
of appropriation of products is the form of their alienation and,
because the form of the appropriation of products is the form of social
labour, so alienation, exchange, is a determined form of social labour
which characterises commodity production.

If one takes into consideration that exchange is the social form of the
production process itself, the form which stamps its mark on the course
of the production process itself, then many of Marx's statements become
completely clear. When Marx constantly reiterates that abstract labour
only results from exchange, he means that it is the result of a given
social form of the production process. Labour only takes the form of
abstract labour, and the products of labour the form of values, to the
extent that the production process assumes the social form of commodity
production, i.e. production based on exchange.

Thus exchange is the form of the whole production process, or the form
of social labour. As soon as exchange really became dominant form of the
production process, it also stamped its mark on the phase of direct
production. In other words, since today is not the first day of
production, since a person produces after he has entered into the act of
exchange, and before it also, the process of direct production also
assumes determined social characteristics, which correspond to the
organization of commodity production based on exchange. Even when the
commodity producer is still in his workshop and has not yet entered into
a relationship of exchange with other members of the society, he already
feels the pressure of all those people who enter the market as his
customers, competitors or people who buy from his competitors, and
ultimately pressure from all the members of the society. This link
through production and these production relations, which are directly
regulated in exchange, continue to be effective even after the specific
concrete acts of exchange have ceased. They stamp a clear social mark
both on the individual and on his labour and the product of his labour.
Already in the very process of direct production itself the producer
appears as producer of commodities, his labour assumes the character of
abstract labour and the product assumes the character of value.

Here it is necessary to guard against a mistake which is made by many
comrades. Many think that because the process of direct production
already has a particular social characteristic, the products of labour,
and labour in the phase of direct production, must also possess
precisely these social characteristics which they possess in the phase
of exchange. Such an assumption is totally false, even though both
phases (production and exchange) are closely connected to each other,
nevertheless the phase of production does not become the phase of
exchange. There is not only a certain similarity between the two phases,
there is still a certain distinction too. In other words, on the one
hand, we recognise that from the moment when exchange becomes the
dominant form of social labour, and people produce specifically for
exchange, that is in the phase of direct production, the character of
products of labour can already be regarded as values. But the
characteristic of the products of labour as values is not yet that which
they assume when they are in fact exchanged for money, when, in Marx's
terms, the 'ideal' value has been transformed into 'real' value and the
social form of the commodity is replaced by the social form of money.

The same is also true of labour. We know that commodity owners in their
acts of production take the state of the market and of demand into
account during the process of direct production, and from the start
produce exclusively in order to transform their product into money and
thus also transform their private and concrete labour into social and
abstract labour. But this inclusion of the labour of the individual in
the labour mechanism of the whole society is only preliminary and
tentative. It is still subject to a strict test in the process of
exchange which can give positive or negative results for a particular
commodity producer. Thus the labour activity of the commodity producers
in the phase of production is directly private and concrete labour and
only indirectly or latently, as Marx puts it, social labour.

Thus when we read Marx's work, and particularly his descriptions of the
way in which exchange influences value and abstract labour, we must
always ask what Marx had in mind in a particular case -- exchange as a
form of the production process itself, or exchange as a separate phase
counterposed to the phase of production.

In so far as exchange as a form of the production process is concerned,
Marx distinctly says that without exchange there is neither abstract
labour nor value, that labour only assumes the character of abstract
labour with the development of exchange. Marx's views are quite clear
and I have developed them in my book.

Where Marx refers to exchange as a separate phase counterposed to the
phase of production, he says that labour and the product of labour
possess a determined social character even before the process of
exchange, but that this character must yet be realised in the process of
exchange. In the process of direct production labour is not yet abstract
labour in the full sense of the word, but has still to become abstract
labour. Numerous statements to this effect can be found in Marx's work.
I should like to quote just two passages from the 'Critique'.

> But the different kinds of individual labour represented in these
> particular use-values, in fact, become labour in general, and in this
> way social labour, only by actually being exchanged for one another in
> quantities which are proportional to the labour-time contained in them
> (_Critique_ p.45)

Elsewhere Marx writes:

> Commodities now confront one another in a dual form, really as
> use-values, and nominally as exchange values. They represent now for
> one another the dual form of labour contained in them since the
> particular concrete labour actually exists as their use-value, while
> universal abstract labour time assumes an imaginary existence in their
> price... (_Critique_ p.68)

Marx maintains that commodities and money do not lose their differences
because of the fact that every commodity must unconditionally be
transformed into money. Each is in reality what the other is ideally,
and ideally what the other is in reality. All Marx's writing on this
show that we must not approach this problem too linearly. We should not
think that because commodity producers are already linked to one another
by determined social relations in the process of direct production,
therefore their products and their labour already possess a directly
social character. The labour of a commodity producer is directly private
and concrete labour, but together with this it acquires an additional
'ideal' or 'latent' characteristic as abstract universal and social
labour. Marx was always amused by the Utopians who dreamed of the
disappearance of money and believed in the dogma that "the private
labour of a private individual contained in (a commodity) is immediately
social labour" (_Critique_ p.86)

We thus come to these conclusions: Abstract labour and value are created
or "come about," "become" in the process of direct production (Marx used
the expression "werden" more frequently for this process) and are only
realised in the process of exchange.

# III

We have spoken up till now of abstract labour. I should now like to move
on to value. Our task is the same in regard to the problem of value as
it was with abstract labour. I tried to show that within the concept of
abstract labour we must also include the characteristic of the social
organization of labour in commodity production. In the same way I should
like to show that within the concept of value we must necessarily
include the social form of value, the social form which the products of
labour assume in commodity production.

The task which lies before us is to introduce social form into the
concept of abstract labour and the concept of value.

How is value usually defined, as distinct from exchange value?

If we take the most popular and widespread conceptions, we can certainly
say that value is usually understood as the labour which must
necessarily be expended for the production of a particular commodity.
The exchange value of a particular commodity is understood as the other
product or other sum of money, for which a particular commodity is
exchanged. If a particular table was produced in three hours' labour and
is exchanged for three chairs, then one usually says that the value of
the table is equal to three hours of labour, and finds its expression in
another product, which is different from the table itself, that is, in
these three chairs. The three chairs represent the exchange value of the
table.

In this kind of popular definition it is usually unclear whether the
value is determined by the labour or whether the value is the labour
itself. Naturally from the standpoint of Marx's theory it is correct to
say that value is determined by labour. But then the question arises:
What is this value, which is determined by labour? We cannot usually
find any adequate answer to this in popular scientific explanations.

Hence the readers form the impression that the value of a product is
nothing other than the labour which must be expended in its production.
The deceptive impression of the complete identity of labour with value
is created.

This idea is very widespread in anti-Marxist literature. One can say
that the majority of the misunderstandings and misinterpretations which
we came across in anti-Marxist literature rest on the false assumption
that for Marx labour is also value.

This false impression frequently arises from the lack of understanding
of the terminology and the train of thought in Marx's work; for instance
Marx's famous words that value is 'congealed' or 'crystallised' labour
is usually construed to mean that labour is also value.

This misconception is fostered by the ambiguity of the Russian verb for
'represent' (darstellen). Value 'represents labour'. But the Russian
translation can be read not only as meaning that value is the
representative or expression of labour -- the only conception which is
consistent with Marx's theory, but also as meaning that value 'is'
labour: This idea is very widespread in the critical literature directed
against Marx, and is obviously wrong.

The critics who interpret Marx's statements that labour constitutes the
substance of value to mean the complete identity of the two concepts, do
not notice the fact that in this case Marx borrowed Hegel's terminology.
Anyone who knows Hegel's 'Logic' with the theory of essence, will
remember that Hegel uses various terms when he attempts to clarify the
relationship between two objects, one which determines and one which is
to be determined. He first says that an object appears as the essence of
the other, then he defines it as the ground for the latter object, next
he describes it as content as distinct from form, later he regards this
same object as substance, as cause and finally he moves on to consider
the interrelation between two objects. It is an interesting fact that in
Marx's works, the whole scale of expressions which we meet in Hegel can
be found, now applied to labour. Labour is also described as the essence
of value, and as its ground, its content, its substance and its cause.
We have to link all these expressions with the methodological principles
on which Hegel's theory is based, and it then becomes clear that Marx's
thesis that labour is the substance of value, can in no way be
interpreted to mean the complete identity of the two.

In my book I advanced this particular thesis in the chapter on the
content and form of value. I was mainly trying to show that labour is
only substance of value, but does not yet represent value. In other
words, when Marx's critics say: 'In Marx's writings the substance of
value is labour, consequently labour is value', it must be emphasised
that labour is only substance of value, and that in order to obtain
value in the full sense of the word we have to add something to labour
as the substance of value, namely the social form of value. Only then do
we obtain the concept of value in the sense in which it is found in
Marx's work.

What then does value represent as the unity of the content or substance
(i.e. labour) and the form of value? What is this value as distinct from
exchange for Marx? To find an answer to this problem we have to ask the
question: How does Marx move from exchange value to value? Why does he
find it necessary to form a new and more abstract concept of value, in
conjunction with exchange value which appears in reality in the act of
exchange?

You will probably know that Marx had not yet made any clear distinction
between exchange value and value in the 'Critique of Political Economy'.
In the 'Critique' Marx begins his interpretation with exchange value,
and from there passes on to value (which he calls exchange value). This
transition is entirely imperceptible, smooth and apparently self
evident.

In 'Capital' Marx makes this transition completely differently and it is
very interesting to compare the first two pages of the 'Critique' with
those of 'Capital'.

The first two pages in both books correspond completely; in both alike
the exposition begins with use value and moves on to exchange value. The
sentence that exchange value at first sight presents itself as a
quantitative relation, as proportion, is found in both books but from
then on the texts begin to diverge. While Marx passes imperceptibly from
exchange value to value in the 'Critique', in 'Capital' the opposite is
the case, as if he intends to linger on this point, foreseeing the
objections from his opponents. After the sentence mentioned above, Marx
comments: "Hence exchange value appears to be something accidental and
purely relative, and consequently an intrinsic value, i.e. an exchange
value that is inseparably connected with, inherent in commodities, seems
a contradiction in terms" (_Capital I_ p.36). Let us take a closer
look. As we can see, Marx had in mind an adversary who wanted to prove
that nothing exists beyond relative values, that the concept of value in
political economy is utterly superfluous. Who was this adversary to whom
Marx was referring?

I would rather not commit myself so precisely, but I assume that this
adversary was Bailey, who tried to prove that the concept of value in
general is unnecessary in political economy, and that we should confine
ourselves to the observation and investigation of particular
proportions, in which the various commodities are exchanged. Bailey met
with great success with his superficial but witty critique of Ricardo,
and attempted to undermine the foundations of the labour theory of
value. He maintained that we cannot speak of the value of a table, but
that we can only say that the table is exchanged for three chairs on one
occasion, for two pounds of coffee on another occasion etc. The
magnitude of the value of the table is purely relative and varies in
different cases. From this Bailey drew the conclusion which led him to
deny the concept of value where the concept of value differs from the
relative value of a particular product in a given act of exchange. Let
us imagine the following case: the value of a table is equal to three
chairs. After a year this table is exchanged for six chairs. We think we
can say that although the exchange value of the table has altered, its
value has remained unchanged, only the value of the chairs has fallen to
half their former value. Bailey finds this assertion meaningless. If the
chairs' relation of exchange to the table has changed, then the table's
relation of exchange to the chairs has changed, and the value of the
table consists only in this.

In order to refute Bailey's theory, Marx thought it necessary to develop
the thesis that we cannot understand exchange value unless it is traced
back to an underlying unity of value. The first section of the first
chapter of 'Capital' is devoted to establishing a basis for this idea,
of making the transition from exchange value to value and from value to
the unity which lies behind it, to labour. The second section is an
extension of the first, in that it simply explains the concept of labour
in more detail. We can say that Marx makes the transition from the
diversity which is observable in the sphere of exchange values to the
underlying unity behind all exchange values, that is to value (and
ultimately to labour). Here Marx demonstrates the incorrectness of
Bailey's conception of the possibility of confining our investigation to
the sphere of exchange value. In the third section Marx retraces the
journey and explains how the unity of value of a specific product is
expressed in its various exchange values.

Previously Marx had moved from diversity to unity; now he moves from
unity to difference. Earlier he refuted Bailey's theory; now he
supplements Ricardo's theory, in which the transition from value to
exchange value was missing. To refute Bailey's theory Marx had to
develop Ricardo's theory further.

In fact, Bailey's intention of proving that no value exists except
exchange value was made easier by the one-sidedness of Ricardo, who
could not show why value appears in a determined form of value. Marx was
therefore confronted with two tasks: 1) to prove that behind exchange
value we have to discover value and 2) to prove that value leads
necessarily to different forms of its manifestation, to exchange value.
In this present lecture I should like to deal only with the former task,
as it is my concern to clarify the concept of value. A complete
elucidation of the concepts of exchange value and money would take me
beyond the confines of my theme.

How then does Marx makes the transition from exchange value to value?
Critics and commentators on Marx usually suppose that his main argument
consists in the well known comparison of corn and iron, on the third
page of the first volume of 'Capital' (_Capital I_ p.37). When one
equates corn and iron, Marx concludes, then there exists in equal
quantities something common to both, the two things must be equal to a
third and this third thing is their value. This is usually thought to
constitute Marx's central argument and the critical blows of his
adversaries are usually directed against this argumentation. There is no
work hostile to Marx which does not make some reference to Marx's
attempt to prove the necessity of the concept of value by a purely
abstract analysis.

But they completely overlooked this fact: the paragraph which deals with
the comparison of corn with iron is no more than a conclusion following
on from the previous paragraph, which is usually disregarded, not only
by the critics but by commentators on Marx also.

The previous paragraph reads:

> A given commodity, e.g. a quarter of wheat is exchanged for 20 pounds
> blacking, 1.5m silk or 1/2 oz gold etc; in short for other commodities
> in the most different proportions. But the exchange value of the
> quarter of wheat remains unchanged, and is expressed only in the
> blacking, the silk and the gold. Consequently the exchange-value must
> contain something distinguishable from these phenomenal
> forms. (_Capital I_ p.37)

Marx worked on this paragraph with care and gave different variations in
various editions. We quoted the passage in the Russian translation of
the German edition which was edited by K. Kautsky. We can follow the
reasoning even more clearly in the second edition of 'Capital', where
the end of this passage reads:

> But since x blacking, y silk or z gold etc. each represent the exchange
> value of one quarter of wheat, x blacking, y silk, z gold etc. must as
> exchange values be replaceable by each other or equal to each other.
> Therefore first: the valid exchange values of a given commodity express
> something equal. (_Capital I_ p.37)

In other words two commodities which are equal to our given commodity,
the wheat, are equal to each other. If we take this conclusion into
consideration, as emphasized by Marx in the variations quoted, we can
see that the next paragraph follows in logical sequence. If follows from
this that one and the same commodity can be expressed in the most
different use-values. In the paragraph quoted, Marx comes to the
conclusion that two commodities, which are exchanged for one and the
same commodity, or are equal to a third, are equal to one another. From
this follows also with logical necessity the converse conclusion, which
Marx reaches in the next paragraph: if two commodities are equal to one
another, then they are equal to a third. It is this thought which Marx
expresses in the paragraph where he compares the wheat with the iron.
Thus Marx's thesis that two commodities which are equal to one another
must also be equal to any third is simply a logical conclusion of the
previous thesis, according to which two commodities which are equal to a
third, are equal to each other. The true sense of Marx's argumentation
consists in the statement of a well known fact about commodity
production, the fact that commodities can be equated with each other and
that a specific commodity can be assimilated with infinite numbers of
other commodities. In other words, it is the concrete structure of
commodity production which forms the starting point of all Marx's
reflections and in no way the purely logical comparison of two
commodities.

Marx thus starts out from the fact of the universal equalisation of all
commodities with each other, or from the fact that every commodity can
be compared with a vast number of other commodities. Nevertheless this
assumption alone is not adequate for all the conclusions Marx draws.
There is another tacit assumption underlying these which Marx expressed
elsewhere.

The second assumption consists in this: we assume that the exchange of a
quarter of wheat for any other commodity, is an exchange which is
governed by a known regularity (_Gesetzmässigkeit_), and the regularity
of these acts of exchange is due to their dependence on the process of
production. We have to reject the notion that the quarter of wheat can
be exchanged for any random quantity of iron, coffee etc. We cannot
agree with the assumption that the proportions of exchange are laid down
each time in the act of exchange itself, and so have a completely
accidental character. We maintain that all these possibilities for the
exchange of a specific commodity with another, are governed by a
determined regularity which is based in the process of production. In
this case Marx's whole argumentation takes the following form:

Marx says: let us take not the accidental exchange of two commodities
wheat, and iron, but exchange in the form in which it actually occurs in
commodity production, and then we will see that each object can be
universally equated with all other objects; in other words, we can
observe countless numbers of proportions of exchange of a given product
with all others. But the proportions of the exchange are not accidental,
they are regular, and their regularity is determined by causes which are
grounded in the process of production.

Thus we reach the conclusion, that independently of the fact that the
value of a quarter of wheat is expressed on one occasion as two pounds
of coffee, on another as three chairs etc., the value of a quarter of
wheat remains one and the same in all the different cases. If we were to
assume that a quarter of wheat has a different value in each of the
infinite number of proportions of exchange -- and Bailey's assertions
amount to this -- then we would be acknowledging that complete chaos
reigns in the phenomenon of price formation, in that sublime phenomenon
of exchange of products, through and by means of which a universal
inter-relation of all modes of labour is established.

We can draw certain conclusions from the train of thought which led Marx
from exchange value to value. I came to one conclusion earlier, when I
referred to the fact that Marx makes commodity production with its
universal equation of all products the starting point of his enquiry, an
equation which is closely connected with the course of the production
process. Marx does not set out from the contrived example of a random
comparison of two commodities, nor from a purely logical analysis of all
the characteristics which they may have in common, but from the real
form of the exchange of products which is characteristic of commodity
production. Our second conclusion comes down to this: when Marx compares
wheat with iron, he finds in both something 'common' and in this
'common' factor he recognizes the value of the products. In the popular
literature, one cannot find a clear answer to the question as to what is
the 'common' factor in the exchangeable products to which Marx refers.
Sometimes it is correctly seen as value, sometimes though it is
identified with labour. If we turn to Marx, we find a clear answer to
the question, on the fifth page of 'Capital': "Therefore, the common
substance that manifests itself in the exchange value of commodities,
whenever they are exchanged, is their value." (_Capital I_ p.38). Marx
therefore does not move directly from exchange value to labour. From
exchange value he moves to the concept of value and then only by further
analysis, from the concept of value to labour. Strictly speaking there
are three stages in the chain of reasoning, as it moves from exchange
value to value and from value to labour.

The conclusion I should like to draw from this, comes down to the fact
which we discussed previously, -- that the concept of value must be
strictly distinguished from the concept of labour, although there is a
tendency, particularly in popular interpretations to explain them as
identical.

But what then is this value, which we obtained by abstraction from the
concrete proportions of exchange, in which our quarter of wheat is
equated with other products. Although we are now abstracting from those
concrete products, for which our quarter of wheat is exchanged,
nevertheless we do not abstract from the social form of value, which
this quarter of wheat possesses, that is, we hold that our quarter of
wheat has the capacity to be exchanged in a determined proportion for
any other product which exists in the particular society.

Further, we consider the product's capacity for exchange to be its
characteristic feature, which is subjected to determined laws, and is in
particular closely linked with the conditions of manufacture of a
specific product. In other words, no longer does the concept of the
social labour necessary for its production alone form part of our
concept of the value of wheat. The concept of social labour which
assumes 'material form', the form of a particular property of a product,
is also included together with the 'content of value' and the 'form of
value'. I should like to give one quotation to show that Marx
distinguishes value from labour as the content of value.

> Every product of labour is, in all states of society, a use value; but
> it is only at a definite historical epoch in a society's development
> that such a product becomes a commodity, viz., at the epoch when the
> labour spent on the production of a useful article becomes expressed as
> one of the objective qualities of that articles i.e. as its value.
> (_Capital_ p.6l)

Thus the content of value (i.e. labour) and the social form of value are
also included in the concept of value. What then is this 'form of value'
which as distinct from exchange value is a part of the concept of value
itself?

I should like to give one very clear definition of the form of value
from the first edition of 'Capital': "The _social form_ of the commodity
and the _form of value_ or _form of exchangeability_ are therefore one
and the same" (_Studienausgabe_ p.235). As may be seen, the form of
value is the description of the form of exchangeability or the social
form of the product of labour which contains the capacity to be
exchanged for any other commodities, in so far as this capacity is
determined by the quantity of labour necessary for the production of a
specific commodity. In this way, we did not depart from the social form
of the product of labour when we made the transition from exchange value
to value. We have only abstracted from that concrete product, in which
the value of the commodity is expressed, but we never lost sight of the
social form of the product of labour.

Our conclusion can also be formulated thus: Marx analyses the 'form of
value' separately from exchange value. In order to introduce the social
form of the product of labour in the concept of value itself, we were
forced to split or divide the social form of the product of labour into
two forms: into the form of value and into exchange value, the former
meaning the social form of the product which has not yet concertized in
a specific object, but represents as it were the abstract character of a
commodity. I have also explained this distinction between the form of
value and exchange value in my book. There I considered them both as
qualitative and quantitative aspect of exchange value, it is true. I did
this mainly because in some places in Marx's work, the terms form of
value and exchange value are scarcely distinguished from one another. A
complete identification of the form of value with the qualitative
aspects and of exchange value with the quantitative cannot be regarded
as correct, since both concepts must be considered both from their
qualitative as well as from their quantitative side.

The question does not bear directly on our theme and I will therefore
not spend any more time on it. I will simply note that this division of
the social form of the product into the form of value and exchange value
is extensively dealt with in my book. I had to introduce the
characteristics of the social form of the product of labour into the
concept of value itself, and thus demonstrate the inadmissibility of an
identification of the concept of value with the concept of labour, an
identification frequently made by popular scientific interpretations of
Marx's theory. In other words: I had to demonstrate that value arises
not only from the substance of value (i.e. labour) but also from the
'form of value', and in order to introduce the form of value into the
concept of value itself, I had to distinguish it from exchange value,
which Marx considers separately from value. I had to divide the social
form of the product into two parts: into social form, which has not yet
acquired a concrete appearance, and into that form which has already
acquired a concrete and independent character.

Now that the distinction between the form of value and exchange value
has been clarified, I should like to turn to the concept of value and
develop the relationship between its various aspects: between the
content or substance of value and the form of value.

What relation exists between labour and that social form of value with
which we have dealt? The general answer to this question runs: the form
of value is the adequate and exact form of the expression of what is
contained in value (i.e. labour).

In order to explain this idea, we must come back to an earlier example:
a table was exchanged for three chairs. We say that this process of
exchange is subject to a determined regularity, and dependent on the
development of and the alterations in the productivity of labour. But
exchange value is a social form of the product, which not only expresses
the alterations in the labour, but also conceals and obscures these very
changes. It obscures them for the simple reason that exchange value is
the relation between two commodities, between the table and the chairs,
and therefore the alteration of the proportions of exchange between
these two articles gives us no information about whether the labour
expended on the making of the table has actually altered. If the table
can be exchanged for six chairs after some time has elapsed, then the
exchange value of the table has altered, while the value of the table
itself may not have changed one iota. In order to examine the process
whereby the change in the social form of the product depends on the
quantity of labour expended in its making, in its pure form, Marx had to
separate the phenomenon as it exists _into two parts._ He had to cut it
across and say that we must study separately those causes which
determine the value of the table, and those which determine the value of
the chairs, and that one and the same phenomenon of exchange (the fact
that the table can now be exchanged for six chairs instead of for three)
can either be caused by reasons connected with the table, or by reasons
stemming from the conditions of the production of the chairs. To examine
the activity of each of these causal chains separately, Marx had to
split the fact of the change in the exchange value of the table into two
parts and assume that these changes are exclusively caused by reasons
effective on the side of the table, i.e. through a change in the
productivity of the labour necessary for the production of the table. In
other words he had to assume that all the other commodities for which
our table is exchanged maintained their original value. Only on this
assumption does the change in the value of the table follow from the
change in the quantity of labour necessary for its production, and the
social form of labour proves to be a more precise and adequate
expression of the content of value or the substance of value (that is of
the quantity of labour expended in the process of production).

The determination of value as unity of content (i.e. labour) and social
form of value, carries the following advantages. We can break with the
widespread identification of value with labour straight away, and so
determine the relation of the concept of value to the concept of labour
more correctly. On the other hand we can also determine the relation
between value and exchange value more correctly. Formerly, when value
was regarded simply as labour and had not yet assumed more precise
social characteristics, this value was on the one hand identified with
labour, and on the other hand separated from exchange value by an abyss.
Economists often saw only labour in the concept of value and could not
make the transition from this concept to the concept of exchange value.
Now, regarding value as the unity of content and form, we link value
through its content with the preceding concept, with labour; on the
other hand though, we link the concept of value through the form of
value with what follows, with exchange value. In fact when we maintain
that value is not labour in general, but labour which has assumed the
form of the exchangeability of the product, then we necessarily have to
make the transition from value to exchange value. Thus the concept of
value is inseparably linked with, on the one hand, the concept of
labour, and, on the other, with the concept of exchange value. But the
inseparable connection of all these concepts should not lead to their
identification with each other. We regard value as social labour which
has assumed the form of an 'objectified' property of the product of
labour, or as the property of the product to be able to be exchanged for
any other product, in so far as this property of the product depends on
the quantity of social labour necessary for its production.

In conclusion I should like to point out that the ability to split the
social form of the product into two parts (the form of value and
exchange value, the former itself belonging to the concept of value,
while exchange value is only a phenomenal form of value) possibly
recalls an analogous procedure in Hegel's writing. Although Marx does
not refer anywhere to a connection between his concept and Hegel's
philosophy, one can find an essential similarity between the division of
the social form in Marx's work, and Hegel's theory of the 'doubling of
the form'. I should like to quote a few lines from the so-called small
'Logic' by Hegel:

> The essential point to keep in mind about the opposition of form and
> content is that the content is not formless, but has the form in its
> own self, quite as much as the form is external to it. There is thus a
> doubling of form. At one time it is reflected into itself; and then is
> identical with the content. At another time it is not reflected into
> itself, and then is the external existence, which does not at all
> effect the content. (_Hegel_'s _Logic,_ Clarendon Press, Oxford 1975
> p.189)

I think the distinction Marx made between the form of value, which is
included in value itself, and exchange value, which represents something
'external', 'undetermined' in relation to value, bears some similarity
with the doubling of form which we find in Hegel.

I now come to the last part of my lecture which concerns the question of
the content or the substance of value. All Marxists agree that labour
constitutes the content of value, but the problem lies in determining
what kind of labour we are speaking of. The previous part of the lecture
should have convinced us as to the variety of different concepts which
can be concealed in the word 'labour'. What kind of labour therefore
constitutes the content of value? Most readers will have taken me to
mean that by the content of value I understand labour in its material
technical form. I admit that this interpretation is justified since
approximately these formulations may be found in my book 'Essays on the
Theory of Value'. Nevertheless I must recall that in my book, in the one
chapter on the content and form of value, one can find not one, but
three formulations which could show that by the content of value I did
not mean labour which is studied exclusively from its material technical
aspect (3). There I wrote

> Labour as the substance of value is not seen by Marx as a determined
> quantity of labour, but as something 'independent and absolute', as
> something accumulated in the product and materially objectified. This
> labour is examined from the standpoint of the process of division of
> social labour among the individual branches of production and taken as
> part of the total social labour in its relation to the latter, as to
> the whole.

Elsewhere I quoted Marx's words on value as "form, in which the
proportional division of labour is expressed." Lastly, the final
conclusion of the chapter reads:

> Considered from the qualitative aspect, the relation between labour as
> 'substance of value' and 'form of value' signifies the relation
> between the process of division of labour and its specific social, and
> exchange form.[^3]

These references should justify my conclusion that I did not take the
content of value to mean labour considered exclusively from the material
technical side. Rather my conception approximated to the concept of
socially equated and divided labour discussed earlier. But this concept,
which can be found in many places in my book, was not adequately
explained, and needed important corrections. In the present lecture I
have drawn a sharp distinction between socially equated labour in
general (which exists not only in commodity production but also, for
example, in socialism) and abstract-universal labour as labour which is
equated in the specific form appropriate to commodity production. Let us
now ask: does Marx understand the content of value to mean socially
equated labour in general or abstract universal labour? In other words,
when we refer to labour as the content of value, do we include in the
concept of labour all those characteristics which we incorporated above
in the concept of abstract labour or do we conceive of labour in the
sense of socially equated labour which does not incorporate those
characteristics which characterise the social organization of labour in
commodity production? Does the concept of labour as the content of value
coincide with the concept of abstract labour which constitutes value, or
is the character of the former concept broader than this? At first
glance one can find arguments in favour of both interpretations of the
'content of value' in Marx's writings. On the one hand one can find
arguments which apparently mean that by labour as the content of value,
we should understand something more limited than abstract labour, that
is, labour without all those social characteristics, which appertain to
it in commodity production.

What arguments can we find to support this solution to the problem?

Marx often meant by content of value something which can not only
acquire the social form of value but another social form too. Content is
understood as something which is capable of assuming differing social
forms. It is precisely this ability which distinguishes socially equated
labour but not abstract labour i.e. labour which has already assumed a
definite social form. Socially equated labour can assume the form of
labour organised in commodity production, and the form of labour
organised in, for instance, a socialist economy. In other words in this
case we are conceiving of socially equalised labour in its abstract form
and disregarding those modifications which are brought about in the
content itself (i.e. labour) by one or other of its forms.

Does this concept of the content of value exist in this sense in Marx's
work? We can now answer this question positively. Think for example of
the passage where Marx says that "exchange value is a definite social
manner of expressing the amount of labour bestowed upon an object."
(_Capital I_ p.82). Labour is clearly being considered as abstract
content here, which can assume either one or another social form. When
Marx writes in his well known letter to Kugelmann on 11th July _1868_
that the social division of labour manifests itself in commodity
production in the form of value, he is again regarding socially divided
labour as the content, which can assume this or that social form.

In the second paragraph of the section on the fetishism of commodities
Marx explains directly that we can find the "content of the determining
factors of value" not only in commodity production but also for example
in a patriarchal family or on a medieval estate. Here, as we see, labour
represents a content which can assume various social forms.

We may now put forward an argument in favour of the opposing thesis,
according to which we have to see abstract labour as the content of
value.

Firstly, we find a few statements by Marx confirming this, e.g.
"(Commodities) relate to abstract human labour as to their common social
substance" (_Studienausgabe_ p.235). This statement leaves no room for
doubt that abstract labour is not only a creator of value but also
substance of value or content of value. The same conclusion may be
reached on the basis of methodological considerations.

I demonstrated earlier that in commodity production, socially equalized
labour assumes the form of abstract labour, and value as the social form
of the products of labour arises necessarily only from this abstract
labour. It follows from this that the concept of abstract labour
directly preceded the concept of value in our system, and that would
show that we must interpret precisely this concept of abstract labour as
the basis, content, or substance of value. But one must also not forget
that in the question of the relation between content and form Marx took
not Kant's but Hegel's standpoint. Kant regarded form as something
external in relation to content and as something which joins on to it
from the outside. From the standpoint of Hegelian philosophy, content
does not represent something which form attaches to from the outside,
rather the content itself in its development gives birth to this form,
which was contained within this content in concealed form. The form
arises necessarily from the content itself.

This is the main thesis of Hegelian and Marxist methodology, a thesis
which stands in contradiction to Kantian methodology. From this
standpoint, the form of value also must arise of necessity from the
substance of value, and consequently we must view abstract labour as the
substance of value, in all the fullness of its social features which are
characteristic for commodity production. Finally for our last argument,
we will point out that when we take abstract labour as the content of
value, an essential simplification of the whole Marxist system is
achieved, since in this case labour as content of value is not
distinguished from the labour which creates value.

So we have reached the paradoxical conclusion that at one point Marx
acknowledges socially equalized labour as the content of value, and at
another he acknowledges abstract labour as this content.

How can we resolve this contradiction?

It seems to me that the contradiction disappears if we remember the
distinction between the two methods, the analytical and the dialectical,
which I discussed at the beginning of my lecture. If we set out from
value as a determined social form, and ask ourselves what is the content
of this form, it will become apparent that this form only expresses the
fact in general that social labour was expended: value proves to be
form, which expresses the fact of the social equation of labour, as a
fact which not only occurs in commodity production, but can also occur
in other kinds of production. By proceeding analytically from the
finished form to its content, we have found socially equated labour as
the content of value. But we reach another conclusion, when we take not
the finished form as starting point, but the content itself (i.e.
labour) from which the form (value) must necessarily arise. In order to
make the transition from labour, regarded as content to value, as form,
we have to include in the concept of labour the social form of its
organization in commodity production, i.e. recognise abstract universal
labour as the content of value. It is possible that the apparent
contradiction in the definition of the content of value in Marx's work
can be explained precisely by the distinction between these two methods.

If we now summarize the interpretation discussed in our lecture, we can
say that the following five concepts are the basic concepts on which
Marxian theory of value and money rests: (1) the relations of production
of the commodity producers, (2) abstract labour, (3) value, (4) exchange
value and (5) money.

Engels pointed out in his article on Marx's 'Critique of Political
Economy', that Marx's contribution consists in showing us the whole
system of the bourgeois economy in its inner interrelations (_Critique_
p.226). Applied to these five categories, Marx's contribution consists
in showing the inner inseparable interrelations between all these
categories. Unfortunately this interrelation was frequently lost sight
of by readers of Marx and these categories were each considered
separately. Let us recollect how the relationship between the five
categories has usually been envisaged.

Let us begin with the relations of production of the commodity
producers. This concept was known to all Marxists. It was generally
known that the theory of the production relations between people is the
basis of Marxian economic theory. But no one made sufficient attempts to
show clearly how these categories arose from people's production
relations. There was therefore a complete break between the first and
second concepts when we made the transition to abstract labour. Abstract
labour was defined as physiologically equal labour, that is, the form of
the production relations between people as commodity producers had been
completely dismissed. _We forgot this form_ and suddenly found ourselves
in the sphere of physiologically equal labour, which is the same in all
historical epochs.

Making the transition from the concept of abstract labour to the concept
of value, it must be said that these two concepts were always closely
connected in Marxist literature. It would actually be very strange, if
the adherents to the labour theory of value did not link the concept of
labour with the concept of value. But this connection was paid for very
dearly in that _value was almost identified with labour_ and it was not
clear in what way value is actually distinguished from labour. There was
a break again in the next transition, from value to exchange value.
Value was identified with labour, and so we did not know how exchange
value arises from value either. Lastly, the relation between the concept
of exchange and the concept of money was always very consistent in
Marxist literature already since Marx emphasised this relation and
substantiated it in particular. Thus the five categories we listed were
split up into three groups. In the first group were the production
relations of commodity producers, in the second, abstract labour and
value, and in the third, exchange value and money. The system was only
interrupted in two places, at the point where we have to move from the
relations of production to abstract labour, and then again from value to
exchange value.

These interruptions disappear when we regard abstract labour as labour
which possesses a determined social form, and value as the unity of
content and form.

Through these two reformulations we now obtain an uninterrupted logical
interrelation of all the categories listed. A determined form of the
production relations of people as commodity producers gives rise to the
concept of abstract labour. From abstract labour in commodity
production, viewed not as physiologically equal labour but as socially
equated labour in a specific form, the concept of value emerged of
necessity. The concept of value, considered as unity of content and
form, is linked through its content with the preceding concept of
abstract labour and through its form with the following concept of
exchange value. Finally, the development of exchange leads of necessity
to value.

It would be contrary to my intention, if the interrelation between these
categories appeared as some logical self-progression of concepts, which
each give rise to one another. The close interrelation of the concepts
which follow on from one another logically is explained by the fact that
all these concepts are built up from the concept of the relations of
production, between people as commodity producers. This concept conceals
a multitude of real social relations between people, which consistently
conflict and develop uninterruptedly. The economic categories express
"forms of existence, determinations of existence, often just individual
aspects of this given society" (_Grundrisse,_ p.106). The logical
unity of the economic categories is due to the real unity of this
society, the actual object of our study.

[^1]: A whole paragraph is devoted to the substance of value, beginning
	with the words: "Hence, when we bring the products of our labour into
	relation with each other as values, it is not because we see in these
	articles the material receptacles of homogenous human labour."
	(p.74). The following paragraph is devoted to the magnitude of value,
	and the next to the form of value.

[^2]: This refers to an article by I. Daschkowski _Abstraktuy trudi
	eknonomitscheskije kategorii Marksa_ ("Abstract Labour and Economic
	Categories in Marx") in _Pod Znamenem Marksizma 6_, Moscow, 1926.

[^3]: These passages were apparently omitted from the German edition of
	"Studien zur Marxschen Wertheorie," and cannot be traced in the
	English edition.
