---
title: Manifesto of the Socialist Propaganda League of America
author: Socialist Propaganda League of America
date: 1916
description: Issued in November 1916 by the far left of the Socialist Party of America, this document declares the decadence of capitalism, clearly anticipates the coming world revolution, and warns of the party's imminent repression by the democratic state. From <https://www.marxists.org/history/usa/parties/spla/1916/1126-spla-manifesto.pdf>.
...

It is manifest to every thinking class-conscious worker that the present
terrific struggle for world power is waged by the capitalist classes to
secure a greater share in the exploitation of labor. It is a matter of
paramount importance that we, as Socialists, apprehend the basic
conditions underlying the strife, and that we prepare to meet the
consequences to the world's workers that will issue from it. This
address to American Socialists and the working class generally is
directed to such an understanding.

The war opens a new era of great conflicts, impelled by the new form of
absolutism -- the rule of the monarchs of money and the subjugation of a
more or less independent class of small capitalists. It means also a
more aggressive policy towards labor. The proof of this appears in the
United States, where the action of government in appropriating a larger
portion of the public revenue to militaristic purposes than any other
country, in a so-called time of peace, is accompanied by the massing of
material capitals amounting to 8 billions of dollars in a single Board,
to "fight labor." War, with the American republic cooperating, thus
becomes the highest form of exploitation by the capitalist class.

In the confusion arising from false issues of the capitalist class, put
forward to mislead the workers, we must ever be on our guard against the
crafty apologists of wrong posing as friends of labor. When we are told
that we must produce more if we would get more, we know the advice is a
bit of special pleading in the interest of those who live without
producing. When we are told that we need compulsory arbitration or
anti-strike laws, we know that such laws not only fail but are a denial
of the working class right to develop all its powers to gain
emancipation. When we are told that we must be patriots, which, when
interpreted by the capitalist class, means readiness to serve in wars to
kill our fellow men and defend the property interests of the owning
class, as the President of the United States has said, we know that the
proletariat is a propertyless class with no country to defend and no
fatherland to fight for. This advice from the President -- servant of
big capital -- is not less erroneous and is certainly more dangerous,
when given under the name of Socialism, advocating a bourgeois citizens'
army or military defense of capitalist interests. We strongly denounce
all brands of social patriots and social imperialists as opposed to the
interests of the working class. Instead of nationalism we must do all in
our power to promote the true internationalism of labor.

To the thoughtful observer it must be apparent that the elements of
wealth production in our present society have outgrown the bourgeois
forms of existing nations in which they are restricted. The
centralization of production, as well as of capital and the monied
interests, the close relation of big business and trusts with finance
capital -- all these developments put great capital not only at the head
of industry and production, as the dominating power, but also in
controlling influence over the political life and activities of the
people. All groups and classes of the people in every so-called
civilized nation are dependent upon the all powerful financial interests
of each nation. There is no difference in this respect between "darkest"
Russia, with its autocratic form of government, and "enlightened" United
States, with its "democratic" institutions that are distinguished by the
denial of free speech and organization and shooting by militia and
"company thugs," for examples of which we do not forget Calumet and
Ludlow.

In the demoniac chase for markets where national capital may be
invested, for the acquisition or retention of colonies and the expansion
of spheres of influence, capitalist power divides the universe for
exploitation among a few groups of nations, and these are bent on
world-control, even at the cost of exterminating each other, as well as
their smaller and dependent associates in crime.

It is this higher phase of capitalist development -- making futile the
policies of free trade, free competition, and the hopes of social
reformers -- that compels the governments of the larger nations to
provide military resources of increasing magnitude to fight for a
leading position in the world scramble for supremacy. In this race for
world leadership we see Germany and England, France and Italy,
Austro-Hungary and Russia, the United States and Japan. The triumph of
neither of them can be achieved without the destruction, immediate or
impending, of them all.

## The Dawn of a New Era.

Comrades and Fellow Workers:

The time is passed when our national Socialist parties, bound by old
forms and moved by old ideals, can proceed with its old propaganda
within the confines of capitalist legality and morals, and expect within
these limits to advance the cause of industrial democracy. We are at the
dawn of a new era; the day is big with the content of social eruptions,
economic and political strikes, revolutions. It is an era in which the
class conflict approaches its climax. The struggle, in all its
variations, develops and intensifies from the new policies of
imperialism; that is, from the encroachments of the capitalist class
using the mailed fist of political governments.

In the class war, all constitutional rights and prerogatives of the
people are ignored or abolished and the capitalist class, abominating
Liberty and supported by guns, meets the working class with the armed
power of the capitalist state. When the workers seek shelter in
constitutional guarantees and essay to use these rights for the
betterment of their conditions, they too often find that rights and
guarantees are mere "scraps of paper." The capitalist class, with
political governments and judicial courts conniving, will tolerate no
interference with their class schemes for world domination. Meanwhile
the condition of the working class becomes steadily worse and the future
less secure. With the cost of essential necessaries of life rising to
higher and prohibitive levels, the average workman is in constant fear
of hunger, and with sickness and disease ever haunting him, has now
reached the stage of habitual privation.

## Reaction and Revolutionary Ideals.

The years immediately behind us are marked by inaction in the Socialist
Party. A true revolutionary spirit and action has never been less in
evidence among the party leaders than during the period of the war. But
before that calamity befell us we were subjected to a flood of
reformistic phrase-mongering, muddling municipalism, boring trade unions
from within, captivating the American Federation of Labor, cramming the
capitalist moral code down the necks of revolutionists to get
middle-class votes, instead of staying on our own job with a consistent
propaganda for revolutionary ideals. The four years of reformistic
preaching and preparation for chronicling the rise of "socialist" votes
to millions in 1916 have proven abortive, while almost none of the rosy
predictions of political leaders have materialized. Still, with a
strange fatuity, they cling to old forms and discredited methods, blind
to the fact: First, That the organization we have is not adapted to
develop political power and the principal function of the Socialist
movement is to participate in the class struggle in such a way that the
workers are educated to realize that their industrial power must back up
a political or general class fight, in which the masses are to gain such
a degree of organization and understanding that they can disorganize the
political supremacy of capitalism and substitute the organization of the
working class, by the exercise of their own influence on uncompromising
Socialist principles. Is it not high time for a thorough reorganization
of the party?

Our Socialist parties still fix their hopes on winning seats in
congresses and parliaments, although the real and fixed location of
government has been transferred to money exchanges and banking
institutions of the money kings. Sacrificing principles of international
brotherhood, they are fighting in wars not for the solidarity and
independence of the workers of all nations, but for the aggrandizement
of their respective national capitals.

Failing to give support to the mass action of the workers in the
industrial field, as evinced at Lawrence, McKees Rocks, the Mesaba
Range, and elsewhere in the United States, and similarly in Germany,
England, and Belgium, the reformers have also failed by constant appeals
to legality to crystallize the revolutionary sentiment on the political
field.

## Must Change With the Times -- Or Perish.

What, then, can be the duty of present-day Socialists, except to
recognize the collapse of the old and resolutely set to work building
the new alongside the industrial evolution and complying with the
requirements of the modern and intensified class struggle? It is high
time for Socialists to abolish obsolete tactics, abandon middle-class
ideals, put away the will-o'-the-wisps of reform, and proclaim a working
class program conforming with and equal to the demands of industrial and
commercial development. The times change; we must change with them -- or
perish.

The new aggressive policy of the capitalist class, which we call
imperialism, has for its primary object the appropriation of a bigger
share of the general surplus values. Under the operation of this feature
of capitalist industry the possessing class appropriates increasing
wealth while the producing mass can not, with the wages received,
provide for themselves and their dependents the necessaries of life.
Therefore, we urge the workers, in America and all other countries, to
organize in their respective industries in such a manner as to ensure
for themselves a material reduction in their working time, a
corresponding increase in their share of the social wealth, the
expansion of their class power, in order that they become efficient
workers for the final overthrow of capitalism and the organization of a
cooperative commonwealth. Finally, we adopt and recommend:

1. Instead of a form of labor organization on the economic field that
conserves the interests of capitalist exploiters and of industrial
democracy, INDUSTRIAL UNIONISM, i.e., MASS ORGANIZATION AND ACTION ON
THE INDUSTRIAL FIELD.

2. Instead of pure and simple electioneering for getting votes and
bourgeois parliamentary reform, RECOGNITION OF PARLIAMENTARY ACTION AS A
PART OF THE GENERAL MASS ACTION, IN WHICH ELECTED REPRESENTATIVES
SUPPORT THIS ACTION BY ADVOCATING FREE SPEECH AND THE RIGHT TO ORGANIZE
AND BY ACTING AS SPOKESMEN OF THE WORKING CLASS, UNDER THE CONTROL OF
THE WORKING CLASS ORGANIZATION, AGAINST THE PLUTOCRATIC GOVERNMENT AND
CAPITALIST REPRESENTATIVES.

3. Instead of a divided struggle of the workers on the industrial and
political fields, cooperation leading to UNDIVIDED MASS ACTION ON BOTH,
TO ADVANCE REVOLUTIONARY PRINCIPLES BY EDUCATION, AND MANIFESTING AS AN
ORGANIZED EXPRESSION OF WORKING CLASS SOLIDARITY FOR THE ULTIMATE
TRIUMPH OF SUCH PRINCIPLES.

4. Instead of surrendering to imperialism, THE DEVELOPMENT OF ALL OUR
POWERS TO OPPOSE MILITARISM, OFFENSIVE OR DEFENSIVE, AND PROMOTE THE
INTERNATIONAL BROTHERHOOD OF LABOR.

5. By mass action we mean: Action by the workers in collective
organization for protest and demand on both the economic and political
fields, for exercising the power of the strike, opposing anti-strike
legislation, refusing military service to maintain capitalism, holding
public meetings and demonstrations, and opposing all capitalist class
means of repressing the rise of industrial democracy. In mass action we
see the only means for the development of a new form of organized
democracy in which the rank and file will control.

6. The Socialist Propaganda League of America endorses the position of
the Left Wing Socialists of Europe and pledges itself to work in harmony
with them for the upbuilding of the Third International, and in the
United States for reorganization of the Socialist Party of this country.
