---
title: "Ireland, Nationalism, and Imperialism: The Myths Exploded"
author: Subversion
date: 1992
description: A pamphlet offering an "analysis of the war in Ireland, looking at the roles of the British state and the republican movement." Published circa 1992 (Subversion 10 lists it as coming soon, subversion 11 lists it as out). Footnotes sourced from a scan of the original pamphlet found at <https://libcom.org/library/ireland-nationalism-imperialism-myths-subversion>. From <https://web.archive.org/web/20091019211950/https://www.geocities.com/athens/acropolis/8195/ire_int.htm>.
...

## Twenty Years on a Knife Edge

>"... the fate of the province \[Northern Ireland\] is still, as it has
been for so long, poised on a knife-edge between a slow climb back to
some form of ordered existence, or a swift plunge into unimaginable
anarchy and civil war."[^01]

These words -- from the closing sentence of F S Lyons' book, _Ireland
Since the Famine_ -- were published as long ago as 1973. Leaving aside
the misuse of the term "anarchy", it is a measure of how little seems to
have changed in the two decades since, that a similar assessment is the
commonplace conclusion to virtually every present-day commentary on
Northern Ireland. Just about the only sign of movement in this bloody
deadlock has been the remorselessly rising death toll. In 1972 it passes
what Lyons described as "the appalling figure" of 600; by 1992 more than
3000 had been killed.

## "Troops Out"

As the bloodshed continues, year after year, with no end in prospect,
it's not surprising that opinion polls carried out in mainland Britain
over the past 20 years have consistently shown that between 50-60% in
favour of a British military withdrawal from Northern Ireland.

The reasons why such a view is expressed are no doubt diverse. Britain's
Ireland Problem, or as some prefer, Ireland's British Problem, has a
complex history stretching back for hundreds of years. Few people really
understand "the Irish Question" and most have no answer to it except to
wash their hands of the whole sordid mess. If the Irish want to shoot
and bomb the hell out of each other, they say, why should we stand in
their way -- just get "our lads" out of there and let them get on with
it.

The best that can be said about such people is that at least they are
not organised into political groups claiming to represent the interests
of the international working class ... which is more than can be said
for a different element within the 50-60% who want Britain to get out of
Ireland, and whose ideas we mainly want to challenge in this pamphlet.

We are referring of course to the members and sympathisers of the
left-wing groups who support "self-determination for the Irish people",
and who would regard withdrawal from the "Six Counties" as a victory for
the Irish people over British Imperialism. Since "Irish
self-determination" is these groups' goal, they naturally push the idea
that it's not for "us Brits" to tell the Irish people how to conduct
their own national liberation struggle. If you oppose the British state
and what it's doing in Northern Ireland, you must automatically give
"unconditional support for republican resistance to sectarian attacks
and British terror" (so say the Anarchist Workers Group).

In this way the left present a mirror image of one of their own
accusations against the British state; while they complain that "any
challenge to Britain's role in Ireland is interpreted as support for the
IRA and therefore subversive"[^02], they themselves tend to see any
criticism of the IRA as justifying the actions of the British state and,
therefore, as apologising for imperialism.

The way we see it, however, these "options" -- to oppose the British
state and support the IRA, or to oppose the IRA and support the British
state -- are both wholly contained within the bounds of capitalist
politics. Instead of looking at the entire range of political and
military groupings critically and arguing that the interests of the
working class lie beyond and against this whole spectrum, they encourage
the working class to line up behind one capitalist faction or another.
This is one of the prime functions of the left, which it performs as
usefully (for capitalism) in relation to Northern Ireland as it does
with regard to many other issues.

## The British State ...

It's certainly not hard to grasp why the British state is regarded with
such loathing in certain parts of Northern Ireland. For over twenty
years the Catholic population has been on the sharp end of a repression
which has been applied in many different ways, but mainly through the
use of armed force and the legal system.

On a military level this has involved the constant presence of as many
as 30,000 members of the British Army, UDR and RUC, who at their most
ruthless have carried out such acts as the massacre of 14 unarmed
demonstrators on "Bloody Sunday", January 1972, and killing of over a
dozen people (many of them young children) with plastic bullets, and
numerous undercover "shoot-to-kill" ambushes aimed at "terrorist
suspects" but frequently resulting in the violent execution of innocent
passers-by unwittingly caught up in stake-outs, or of teenage joy riders
speeding through roadblocks. Clearly, there are more "terrorists"
operating in Northern Ireland than just the IRA!

The legal system has also played a vital role, through the use, at
various times, of mass internment without trial, torture and
ill-treatment of suspects during interrogation, Diplock courts (i.e. no
jury), conviction of defendants on the basis of uncorroborated evidence
provided by "supergrasses", and the sweeping measures of the Prevention
of Terrorism Act. (During the past 10 years -- 1982-1991 -- nearly
14,500 people in Northern Ireland and mainland Britain have been
detained under the PTA, supposedly on "very real suspicion of
terrorism"; of these only 230 -- 1.5% have even been charged with
terrorist offences, let alone convicted.[^03]) On top of all this, there
is also the systematic and calculated everyday harassment of car drivers
and pedestrians being stopped for identity checks, and the frequent
invasion of Catholic areas by the army and RUC in order to carry out
house-to-house searches (amounting in 1990 to an average of at least one
house raid taking place every two hours).

Of course, there's little justification for any expressions of moral
outrage by the IRA and its supporters about any of this. To claim, as
they do, that there is a war going on in Northern Ireland, and then to
criticise the British state for behaving just as any state does in
war-time, is like wanting to have your cake and eat it. Nevertheless, as
we've said, it's no wonder the British state is hated -- and that many
on the receiving end of its brutalities want to fight back against it.
The question is, though, by what means, and to what end?

## ... And Its Opponents

Although our argument is that the Republican struggle is not in itself a
struggle for working class interests, there are certain things mixed up
with it that we would support. Like, for example, the "Free Derry"
"uprising" of August 1969, when the Catholic Bogsiders organised
themselves to repel attacks by Protestant marchers and the police with
stones, petrol bombs and burning barricades.

This is no different to the solidarity we have expressed in the past
with the working class inhabitants of inner city areas in Britain such
as Toxteth, Brixton or Tottenham, when, fed up with daily police
harassment on the streets and with having their homes smashed up in
raids for drugs or stolen property (the like of which is part-and-parcel
of everyday life for thousands of working class people in Northern
Ireland), they have erupted onto the streets and temporarily driven out
the police.

We support such riots not because we think they are somehow inherently
revolutionary, but for the basic reason that they show a spirit of
rebellion alive within the working class and an unwillingness to put up
with attacks on its conditions of living. A class which doesn't fight
back against the hardships which are imposed on it is unlikely to ever
rise up and overthrow its oppressors.

We are for the expulsion of all armed gangs from working class areas of
Northern Ireland -- be they the British army, the loyalist
paramilitaries, or the IRA. However, the type of working class
self-defence against state oppression and sectarian attacks which mainly
took the form of rioting seems to have become less common in Northern
Ireland.

On one side, the army and the RUC have been less willing to tolerate the
existence of the semi-official barricaded "no-go areas" which were
commonplace in the early years of the present day "Troubles". While on
the other side, Sinn Fein and the Provisional IRA have been equally
determined to keep as much resistance to the British state as possible
under their control: "This is a special message for young people -- no
hijackings, no joy riding, no stone throwing at the Brits. If you want
to do these things, there are organisations to do this for you." --
Gerry Adams, President of Sinn Fein.[^04]

This as an important consequence for the position we adopt towards
events in Northern Ireland, because, when groups like the RCP
(Revolutionary Communist Party) state that "Workers who live in the
imperialist heartland have a special duty to back those fighting against
the British oppressor"[^05], what this largely boils down to at the
present time is that we should support the "armed struggle" being waged
by the IRA and the other, smaller Republican groups.

## The Rise of the Provisional IRA

In our view the rise of the Provisional IRA represented a tragic step
back for the Catholic working class in Northern Ireland.

In the late 1960s and early 1970s the Civil Rights Association in
Northern Ireland was agitating for an end to discrimination against
Catholics. At the origins of the civil rights movement lay genuine
working class concerns over issues such as housing and unemployment. If
these issues had been taken up on the basis of fighting for working
class needs, there would have been a chance of uniting Catholic and
Protestant workers, since all workers have a material interest in
struggling for better housing and higher wages.

However, rather than fighting for more and better resources, which could
have achieved real material improvements in conditions for all working
class people, the Civil Rights Association's campaign to establish the
so-called rights of a persecuted minority within civil society amounted
to merely demanding a more equitable sharing out of the miserable
resources which already existed. This movement was, moreover, deeply
imbued with liberal illusions about achieving equality and justice -- in
a system which by its very nature cannot do anything but generate
inequality and injustice.

The direction of this movement was driven even further away from its
origins by the reaction of the Northern Ireland Unionists, who regarded
the civil rights campaign as a threat to their "privileged" position.
Northern Ireland was certainly no paradise for working class
Protestants. Their "privileges" didn't amount to much more than having a
slightly less shitty slum to live in or a slightly less miserably paid
job to go to than their Catholic neighbours. As the Dublin based
anarchist Workers' Solidarity Movement puts it, "The reality of Orange
bigotry is one of 2 1/2p looking down on 2p".[^06] Nonetheless, the
civil rights movement's demand that Catholics should have equal access
to jobs and housing previously reserved for Protestants was perceived by
Protestant workers as something that would undermine their own already
precarious standard of living. It's not hard to see, for example, that
if a factory employed 600 Protestants and no Catholics, where without
religious bias in employment there would be 400 Protestants and 200
Catholics, then 200 Protestants would feel their jobs under threat by
any call or an end to discrimination.

Protestant working class hostility towards the civil rights movement was
of course fostered by the Northern Ireland ruling class. Ever since the
establishment of the Northern Irish state at the start of the 1920s, the
outlook of the Unionist ruling class had been dominated by a mixture of
aggression and insecurity aptly summed up as "the politics of siege". It
pursued its own survival through a classic policy of "divide and rule",
on the one hand demonising the Catholic population within Northern
Ireland as the treacherous "fifth column" of its southern enemy, and on
the other hand tossing just enough crumbs to the Protestant working
class to convince them that their interests were identical with those of
their rulers.

Whenever Catholic and Protestant workers did show any signs of joining
together, the ruling class was always quick to find a way to whip up
renewed sectarian hostility, in order to destroy working class unity.
The Outdoor Relief strike of October 1932, for example, when the
unemployed of the Falls and Shankhill fought side-by-side against the
police, was followed less than three years later by a long summer of
bloody sectarian rioting in Belfast which left 11 dead and nearly 600
injured.

In the late 1960s, if the Northern Ireland ruling class needed any extra
incentive to crush any signs of working class struggle within its own
territory, then it only needed to look across at mainland Europe, where
in France in 1968 and in Italy in 1969, the working class was defying
all the sociologists and media pundits who said it had been dissolved in
the "affluent society" with a series of massive strikes.

It was against this background that the Civil Rights Association's
mainly peaceful protests were frequently met with savage violence meted
out by the RUC and the notorious B Specials. The IRA did nothing to halt
these attacks; legend has it that its initials were now said to stand
for I Ran Away. Initially Catholics had to organise their own
self-defence -- as they did, for example, at the start of "Free Derry".
It was in these circumstances that the Provisional IRA emerged.
Increasingly, Catholics turned to the Provisionals for defence, first of
all against sectarian pogroms, and later against the British army.

Although in recent years Sinn Fein and the IRA have fought a
twin-pronged campaign "with the ballot paper in on hand and an Armalite
in the other", the Provisional IRA initially came together as a purely
military organisation. Unlike the Official IRA, from which they had
split during 1969-70, the Provos had no interest whatsoever in the sort
of reforms demanded by the Civil Rights movement, since the Provos' aim
was not to modify the Northern Ireland state but to get rid of it. At
first even the Stalinists of the Official IRA were denounced as too
left-wing by the Provos -- though "when the Provisionals came to write
their own programme after the split (published as _Eire Nua_ in 1972),
they actually based it on an old document that the Stalinist Coughlan
\[i.e. Official IRA member Anthony Coughlan\] had written before the
split".[^07]

## Revolutionary Potential?

In a relatively short space of time, therefore, the reaction of the
Northern Ireland Unionists and the British army aborted a movement with
its origins in working class grievances over jobs and houses, and
rejuvenated in its stead, among a section of the population which
throughout the 1960s had shown little explicit interest in wider
constitutional issues such as partition, a military campaign for the
political end of uniting Ireland.

What this says to us is that the Provisional IRA did not develop
organically out of the struggles of the Catholic working class in
Northern Ireland, any more than, say, the Labour Party or the trade
unions are a direct outgrowth of the current struggles of the working
class in Britain.

When we point this out, one response we get is that we should still
support the armed struggle, even though it is controlled by the IRA, in
the same way that we support strikes, even though they may be controlled
by the trade unions. Or as someone who wrote to _Class War_ about this
issue put it: "So what if the IRA defends a Catholic, nationalist
community? Would you attack strikers if they supported the Labour
Party?"

In fact, this analogy only strengthens our case against supporting the
armed struggle in Northern Ireland. The basic motivation of workers who
join a trade union or the Labour Party thinking that it will fight for
working class interests may be sound but their course of action is not.
Yet a strike organised be a trade union and involving workers who
support the Labour Party does have the potential to go beyond these
initial limitations. This is because strikers are pursuing their
material interests as members of the working class. Sooner or later this
will bring them into conflict with capitalist organisations such as the
trade unions and the Labour Party. If their struggle is then to proceed
any further, the strikers are forced to go beyond the forms and ideas
they started with, by in practice rejecting trades unionism and
Labourism.

We know, both from our own experiences of direct involvement and
political intervention in strikes, and from looking at the history of
previous high-points of the class struggle in many different countries,
that this does frequently happen. So far it has been most noticeable
only among a minority of the working class, because only a minority,
usually, is ever involved in the class struggle, and it is only this
active involvement which is necessary for the old practices and ideas to
be challenged and overturned. Nonetheless, such a process does occur.

By contrast, the fact that after 20 years of the modern day "Troubles"
in Northern Ireland there is still no sign that any significant minority
of the Catholic working class has gone beyond the outlook which
dominated it back in 1969, nor any indication of the armed struggle
developing wider perspectives than those set by the IRA, speaks volumes
about the class nature and potential of the struggle in Northern
Ireland.

## "My Enemy's Enemy Is My Friend"

We don't shed any tears for the police, soldiers and politicians killed
by the IRA; our only regret on seeing someone like Norman Tebbit dug out
of the ruins of the Grand Hotel in Brighton after the IRA bombed the
1985 Conservative Party conference was that he was still alive. But this
doesn't mean that we automatically share a common cause with anyone and
everyone who opposes the British state besides ourselves. We don't judge
the class nature of a struggle by the targets it attacks. We must also
take into account the purposes and intent which motivate such actions.

As communists we oppose the state because it is the instrument the
capitalist class uses to enforce and maintain its domination over the
working class. In overthrowing capitalism the revolutionary struggle we
agitate for will abolish ALL nation states and national boundaries.
Clearly, the Irish Republican movement's opposition to the British state
is not founded on this basis. It seeks merely to re-arrange the existing
national boundaries by establishing a new state with jurisdiction over
the whole of the island of Ireland. This new state would be just as much
an enemy of the working class struggle as are the existing British and
Irish states.

The notion that "the enemy of my enemy is my friend", which leads some
people to support the IRA, invariably misjudges who or what the real
enemy is, and so ends up dragging the working class into taking sides
with "nice" factions of the capitalist class in its squabbles with the
"nasty" factions of the same class. We see this in anti-fascist fronts
where the working class allies itself with "democratic" capitalists
against "totalitarian" capitalists, and in anti-imperialist struggles
where the working class fights its present "imperialist" bosses in
alliance with its future "home grown" bosses. However, the real enemy of
the working class is not any of these different factions of the ruling
class but the entire capitalist system itself.

What is wrong with the working class taking sides in struggles among
rival capitalists was neatly summed up during the Spanish Civil War by
the council communists who published the journal _International Council
Correspondence_, when they said that it amounted to encouraging the
working class to "co-operate with one enemy in order to crush another,
in order later to be crushed by the first" ... which is exactly what did
happen in Spain, when the social revolution which also broke out in 1936
was first of all subordinated to, and then destroyed by, those who
sought to preserve one form of capitalist rule (democracy) against
another (fascism), and when, from May 1937 onwards, members of the POUM
and the CNT-FAI were imprisoned, murdered or generally terrorised by
their erstwhile anti-fascist allies, the Spanish "Communist" Party.[^08]

The outcome of past "national liberation struggles" shows that the
working class always ends up being oppressed just as much by its
so-called "liberators" as it was by its old imperialist masters. IRA
supporters, like the RCP, admit that they can see this prospect taking
shape among "liberation movements" such as the ANC and the PLO, as soon
as they sniff the scent of state power: "Yesterday's freedom fighters
are everywhere climbing into business suits, talking diplomacy, and
looking for compromise on terms dictated by their enemies".[^09] What
makes them think that Gerry Adams and co. will behave any differently
when the British government invites Sinn Fein to the conference table to
settle the war in Ireland.

## The Myth of National Self-Determination

Many of the left-wing groups who argue for British withdrawal from
Northern Ireland do so because they believe in the principle of
"national self-determination" in opposition to imperialism. The RCP, in
the "What We Fight For" statement which appeared in every issue of its
newspaper, _The Next Step_, declares that it supports "Irish
self-determination". The slogan of the Troops Out Movement (TOM) is
"self-determination for the Irish people as a whole". The Troops Out
Movement defines "self-determination" as the "right of people within a
nation to determine their own political, social and economic affairs
free from external control".[^10]

By promoting this so-called "right" left-wing groups such as the RCP and
TOM give credence to two dangerous myths.

First, to speak of "the nation" or "the people" as if these are
homogeneous entities flies in the face of the reality that capitalist
society is divided into mutually antagonistic classes. "The people as a
whole" have never determined their own "political, social and economic
affairs". In every country, political, social and economic policies are
drawn up by, and in the interests of, the ruling class. What is
presented as being for the good of the nation is purely for the benefit
of the bosses. Any ideology which denies this is so, is a barrier which
must be broken down if the working class is to assert its own
independent class interests.

Even the titles of TOM's own publications -- such as _In Whose Name?_
and _Without Consent_ -- with their central argument that "Britain is
pursuing a war in Ireland without a political mandate to do so from its
own people"[^11] tell us that the object which TOM seeks to win for
Ireland doesn't even exist in Britain. By agitating for the "right of
self-determination" TOM encourages workers to waste their efforts in
chasing something which cannot be achieved.

Secondly, it is an illusion to suggest that a nation such as Ireland --
or to be more precise, the ruling class within a united Ireland -- could
determine its affairs "free from external control". The rulers of any
newly "independent" nation-state immediately find themselves having to
come to terms with a worldwide economic system dominated by powerful
blocs and integrated on a global scale. Their room for manoeuvre within
this framework is extremely limited.

In the twentieth century the typical outcome of national liberation
struggles has been one or other of two scenarios. Either the imperialist
power relinquished direct political control but continues to exert its
domination at an economic level; or the client state frees itself
entirely from the domination of one imperialist bloc only by switching
to the all-embracing grip of a rival bloc. In neither of these instances
does even a "successful" national liberation struggle result in any real
independence for the local capitalists; nor is there any weakening of
imperialism as a whole.

## The Irish "Free" State

Any supporter of "Irish self-determination" who believes that "national
liberation" is possible in any meaningful sense within modern capitalism
should look at the history of the south of Ireland since it achieved
"independence" in 1922.

The separation of the Irish Free State from the rest of Britain did
nothing to alter the two states' economic relationship, in which Ireland
exported agricultural produce to Britain, and Britain sold manufactured
goods to Ireland. At no time before the Second World War did Ireland
send less than 90% of its total exports to British markets. And, as the
south was so dependent on "free trade", it could not risk placing the
sorts of tariffs on imported manufactured goods which might have
encouraged growth in its own feeble industrial sector.

In the early 1930s de Valera's Fianna Fail party came to power
determined to free Ireland from British domination through a policy of
economic nationalism. They believed that Ireland could become "a
self-contained unit, providing all the necessities of living in adequate
quantities for the people residing in this island at the moment and
probably for a much larger number".[^12]

Predictably, however, the protectionist policies which were implemented
in pursuit of this drew retaliation from the south's economic
competitors. It didn't help either that the policy of economic
nationalism was set in motion in the midst of a global economic
depression. The gap between the cost of imports and the income earned
from exports widened greatly to Ireland's disadvantage. This constant
trade deficit drained the nation's foreign currency reserves which
further weakened Irish capital's standing in the world market. Also,
even extensive state intervention in the economy, intended to stimulate
Irish owned domestic manufacturing, could not provide sufficient capital
to build up industries capable of competing against Ireland's far more
advanced rivals on the world market.

Between 1931-39 the average income per head in Ireland dropped from
nearly two thirds of what it was in Britain, to just under half. "The
Irish people" showed just how much say they had in "determining their
own affairs" by deserting "their nation" in droves: more than 300,000
people emigrated during the period 1936-51, followed by a further
400,000 over the next ten years to 1961. It was only this massive export
of "surplus" population which kept standards of living for those who
stayed behind from declining even more steeply.

By the late 1950s the dream of economic self-sufficiency had been
exposed as an unattainable illusion. Protectionist policies were
abandoned and the south set about wooing investment by foreign capital.
Ever since then, as had been the case beforehand too, the south of
Ireland has been completely bound up with the fortunes of the world
market, and no more able to escape from the inevitable booms and slumps
of the global economy than any other nation state.

## The Policies of Sinn Fein

We would be stretching our argument beyond credibility, however, if we
gave the impression that the supporters of a united Ireland are fine
idealists whose best intentions would sadly be frustrated by the
economic dictates of world capitalism. Of course Sinn Fein and the IRA
say (as every other national liberation movement has said -- before
coming to power) that the working class would be better off in its
"Thirty Two County Socialist Republic". But whereas for us socialism
means the complete abolition of money, wage labour, the market system
and the state, Sinn Fein's so-called "socialism" amounts to nothing more
than a mixture of state capitalism and self-managed (i.e.
self-exploited) agricultural co-operatives which has never been of any
benefit to the working class whenever or wherever such measures have
been implemented in the past.

If Sinn Fein's economic programme leaves everything to be desired, its
stance on many social issues is equally unattractive. In February 1992,
amidst all furore which followed the Irish Attorney General's initial
decision to prevent a 14 year old rape victim from travelling to England
to have an abortion, Sinn Fein's annual conference endorsed a women's
policy document which stated: "We accept the need for abortion only
where a woman's life is at risk or in grave danger."[^13]

## "Popular Justice"

It's not just the long-term aims the IRA is fighting for which make it
an enemy of the working class. There's also the IRA's present-day role
in policing Catholic communities in Northern Ireland.

According to an article which appeared in _The Guardian_ on 22 October
1990, the IRA had so far that year carried out 89 punishment shootings
(a bullet in the ankles, knees, wrists or the base of the spine) and 56
beatings (prolonged assaults with iron bars or baseball bats producing
multiple injuries). In addition it had also ordered another 20 or 30
"offenders" to get out of Northern Ireland -- or else face the
consequences. Since then "expulsion orders" have been on the increase
and by February 1992 they were said to be running at 3 a week (i.e. 150
a year).[^14]

Recently the IRA has also developed less thuggish ways of policing the
Catholic communities, such as manipulating the courts and social
services into administering what are in effect custodial sentences.
Youths who it has been made clear are under threat of punishment by the
IRA are given "place of safety" orders by the magistrates courts for
their own protection and have to serve their time in young offenders
centres until the IRA decides that it is safe for them to return to
their home.[^15]

We ourselves see nothing wrong with working class communities organising
themselves to take direct action against anti-social elements such as
drug pushers or burglars who rob from working class people's houses.
Some of the "petty criminals" dealt with by the IRA may well fall into
this category and deserve some sort of punishment -- then again, you
could say the same about some of the people punished by the ruling
class's legal system. The point is that a lot of them don't deserve it.
There's nothing necessarily "anti-social" about, for example, people who
steal from shops -- yet they too fall foul of the swift, brutal,
self-appointed policing of the IRA.

Many of the victims of IRA punishments are joyriders. The police are
reluctant to respond to reports of stolen vehicles for fear of IRA
ambushes and booby trap bombs. The IRA steps into this vacuum and takes
action against joyriders under the guise of "reluctantly responding to
community pressure".[^16] In this way the IRA takes credit for clearing
up a mess which it has largely contributed to creating in the first
place!

Once again though we must look not at the IRA's targets so much as it s
reasons for attacking them. The IRA's main reason for carrying out
punishments is to reinforce its rule over the territory it controls.
People are encouraged to contact the "Republican movement" if they are
concerned about crime, rather than calling the police (or doing
something about it themselves). The less the RUC enters the Catholic
ghettos, the better the IRA likes it, since it gives their members
greater freedom to go about their activities. Anyone who, even
inadvertently, fouls up an IRA operation by calling the police into a
Catholic area instantly turns themselves into an informer and faces the
ultimate penalty: death.

The IRA's so-called "popular justice" may be an alternative within the
Catholic communities to the policing carried out by the RUC, but only in
the same sense that the Labour Party is an alternative to the Tories: it
is not qualitatively different. This conclusion -- that there is nothing
to choose between being policed by the IRA or by the RUC -- is one that
has been voiced within the Catholic community itself: "When you have
Sinn Fein and the IRA talking about human rights abuses in the likes of
Castlereagh (the RUC interrogation centre), its sickening for them to
dish out summary so-called justice like this".[^17]

We might also point out that at the same time as it is going around
crippling petty thieves and teenage joyriders, the IRA itself is raising
funds through all sorts of rackets which, far from being petty, net it
an income amounting, according to one estimate, to around 10 million
pounds a year.[^18] But then again, the whole of capitalism is based on
robbery, it's just that the ruling class decides what sorts are legal
and what sorts are not.

## The Future

While both the IRA's present actions and the goals it is fighting for
mark it out in our eyes as an anti-working class organisation,
speculation about what a united Ireland governed by Sinn Fein would be
like is largely academic -- because it's highly unlikely to come about.
Although high-ranking British military officers have admitted on many
occasions that they are never likely to be able to wipe out the IRA
completely, the British state can still just about manage to sustain the
political, social and economic costs of containing the impact of the
"Troubles" at a tolerable level.

There is no way that any Dublin government could cope in the same way
with 900,000 hostile Protestants in the north of a united Ireland. Even
the IRA doesn't expect that the Protestants would integrate themselves
happily into a 32 County Republic, and has to concede lamely that "They
are a tiny national minority who must be given guarantees within any
united Ireland"[^19] -- which is about as plausible as arguing that if
the Catholic minority in Northern Ireland was given "guarantees" by the
British state the IRA would agree to the continuation of British rule in
the north. This is the main reason, then, why British troops remain in
Northern Ireland: to prevent an escalation of the "Troubles" which would
plunge Ireland into chaos, thus threatening NATO's strategic interests
and British, U.S. and EEC economic interests.

So, we do not foresee any change in the constitutional set-up in
Northern Ireland in the near future. Nor are there many signs -- at the
moment -- of any resurgence in the currently very low level of the class
struggle there. The two communities, Catholic and Protestant, seem to be
pitted against each other every bit as much as the ruling class wants
them to be, since there is every advantage for British capitalists in
maintaining the policy of "divide and rule" which keeps workers' living
standards in Northern Ireland so much lower than in the rest of Britain.

This isn't to say that these divisions couldn't be overcome in the
course of massive class struggle, but where this mass struggle will come
from is hard to foresee. At present, the fear once expressed by some
members of the ruling class, that "If we lose in Belfast, we may have to
fight in Brixton or Birmingham"[^20] -- in other words, that the
struggle in Northern Ireland could be the spark which ignites the flames
of insurrection on the mainland -- seems less well-founded than the
prospect of a working class revolution which spreads from the Republic,
Britain and the rest of Europe. But this doesn't mean that the prospects
for the class struggle in Northern Ireland can be written off. The
inherent instability and unpredictability of capitalism, and the
impossibility of eradicating the class struggle altogether, means that
we can never predict for certain where or when the next upsurge in
working class struggle will occur.

Until this happens, no doubt the war in Northern Ireland will drag on.
But we should be in no doubts about what sort of war it is. The fact
that thousands of Protestant workers have sided with the British state
and its Loyalist appendages or that thousands of Catholic workers give
their support to Sinn Fein and the IRA does not alter the capitalist
nature of the conflict. The ruling class -- or those who aspire to
become the ruling class -- have always been able to rope the working
class into fighting their battles for them. Our attitude to the
situation in Northern Ireland may not find much of an echo among workers
there at present, but for genuine revolutionaries there can be no
alternative to calling for a united working class struggle against both
sides!

[^01]: F S Lyons, _Ireland Since the Famine_ (revised edition, 1973),
  page 780.

[^02]: Troops Out Movement, _In Whose Name? Britain's Denial of Peace in
  Ireland_, page 22.

[^03]: Home Secretary, Kenneth Baker, speaking on "The World Tonight",
  BBC Radio 4, 24.2.1992; figures from _The Guardian_, 24.2.1992.

[^04]: Quoted in _Organise!_ no. 20, Aug.-Nov. 1990.

[^05]: "What We Fight For", _The Next Step_, 16.6.1989.

[^06]: "Getting to Grips With Sinn Fein's Socialism", _Workers'
  Solidarity_ no. 28, Summer 1988, reprinted in Workers' Solidarity
  Movement, _Northern Ireland and British Imperialism_.

[^07]: "The Shame of Irish Communism", _The Next Step_, February 1985.

[^08]: _International Council Correspondence_, Sept. 1937.

[^09]: "Can the IRA Survive?", _Living Marxism_ no. 23, August 1991.

[^10]: Troops Out Movement, _In Whose Name? Britain's Denial of Peace in
  Ireland_, page 5.

[^11]: _Ibid_, page 29.

[^12]: Sean Lemass, quoted in F S Lyons, _Ireland Since the Famine_,
  page 610.

[^13]: _The Independent_, 24.2.92.

[^14]: _The Observer_, 23.2.92.

[^15]: _The Observer_, 23.2.92. _New Statesman and Society_, 28.2.92.

[^16]: Alex Maskey, Sinn Fein member of Belfast City Council, quoted in
  _The Guardian_, 22.10.1990.

[^17]: Henry Robinson of Families Against Intimidation and Terror,
  quoted in _The Guardian_, 2.1.92.

[^18]: _The Guardian_, October 1990.

[^19]: IRA spokesman quoted in _The Observer_, 2.2.92.

[^20]: John Biggs-Davidson, quoted in R Faligot, _The Kitson Experiment_
  (1983).
