---
title: Programme
author: World Communist Group
date: 1989
description: The World Communist Group has or had its origins in the group around Jacques Camatte. See url for more details. The original text has been cleaned up some for this red texts version. Certain words that were mistranslated into English have been corrected. Theorically becomes theoretically, egality becomes equality, inconditionnal becomes unconditional, etc. Obvious typos have been fixed. From <https://web.archive.org/web/20100211011333/http://groupe-communiste-mondial.org:80/en/publications/publications1.html>.
...

>"Before achieving a socialist change, a dictatorship of the
>Proletariat, a first condition of which is the proletarian army, is
>needed. The working classes will have to conquer on the battle field
>their right to their own emancipation. The work of the International is
>to organize and to coordinate the workers' forces for the fight
>awaiting them." - Marx, 1871.

The World Communist Group is based on the following historical,
theoretical and programmatic principles,

1\. The historical development of the capitalist production accumulates
a rising contradiction between the productive forces and the relations
of production, that engenders the class struggle between the Proletariat
and the Capital.

2\. The Bourgeois economic system follows a progressive development and
develops its own negation as a final result. When the relations of
production have become too tight and hinder the productive forces'
development; when the material and spiritual conditions coming out from
the bosom of the old society are fulfilled for new and superior
relations of production, an era of social revolution starts up for the
conservation or destruction of the actual capitalist production mode,
indissolubly linked to the upholding or the overthrow of the present
Bourgeois State.

3\. Based on the representative system of social and political
democracy, the Bourgeois State of class domination constitutes the organ
of the Capital's dictatorship.

4\. Defended by the Bourgeois State, the conservation of the present
relations of production is assured by the scientific continuity of the
process of the capitalist production, to which the Proletariat is
submitted, because the process accumulates the Capital's wealth and
produces the latter's destitution.

5\. The Proletariat can neither break nor modify the capitalist
relations of production from which ensue its exploitation and the
oppression of mankind, without slaughtering the state power of the
Capital, nor struggle against this power and overthrow this state
without forming itself into a class, therefore into Communist Party.

6\. The Capital is the value in process, having reached autonomy, whose
being consists in its movement as a value endlessly multiplying itself.
Linking the productive forces' development to their periodic
destruction, the phase of real domination of the Capital -- imperialist
and fascist -- breeds economic and social crisis, catastrophes and
cataclysms.

7\. As necessary to its conservation, as moments of its vital process,
as conditions of its regeneration, the regular and cyclic destruction of
Capital restores the continuity of the capitalist production process,
then brought back, by violence, to the point where -- without killing
itself -- it is able again to make full use of its productive capacities
and to still expand its accumulation process.

8\. The expansion of the Capital, punctuated by the periodical and
universal convulsions still more extreme and universal, necessarily
determines the come-back of the capitalist system's catastrophic crisis,
which unleashes the social and political explosions, gathers the
historical conditions for its violent overthrow -- among them the
revival of the Communist Party opening the historical cycle of the
proletarian revolution -- and gives way to the classical alternative:
world imperialist war -- means of the historical regeneration of the
capitalist production process -- or/and world communist revolution.

9\. Unable to overcome its economic anarchy -- which is its law -- and
to remove the division of society into classes and the State, Capitalism
-- production and reproduction of the specifically capitalist relations
of production -- progressively achieves the political, economic, and
social democracy: it is interest that unites the members of the
Bourgeois Society, whose real link is made up by civil life and not by
political life; by suppressing the Capital, the social classes and the
State, Communism suppresses democracy and therefore achieves the Human
Community.

10\. With the political democracy, the Bourgeoisie takes possession of
the state, and appropriates its community. The Capital frees itself from
the ideological, social, political and economic remnants of the previous
historical formations; it destroys them and institutes its dictatorship
as a representative system of the parliamentary democracy. With its
accession to the real domination, the Capital constitutes itself into a
material community that subjects to itself all the economic and social
productive forces. As the Capital's properties, the determined relations
into which enter the classes within the production process of their
social life, emerge as the omnipowered natural law, crushing the
individual's free will, mastered by the economic process as well as by
the Capital's ideological representations. The capitalist class owns and
rules the production and trade means. The ancient petty-bourgeoisie
collapses and disappears while the peasantry dissolves itself into the
wage-system. The Capital produces new-middle stratas, stratas for
consumption, unproductive and parasitic, linked to the development of
the social production of work and indispensable to the realization of
value and to the movement of the Capital. The exploitation of the
working-class power work produces surplus value, extorted by overwork,
thanks to which the Capital accrues. The political democracy vanishes;
the parliamentary institutions decline. The economic and social
democracy regulates thus the working-classes' subservience to their own
products and trades, that have been erected into independent material
powers: the Capital. Having reached the extreme stage of the Bourgeois
Society, the Proletariat can only acquire an identity as a class with
the Capital's catastrophic crisis that breaks the scientific continuity
of the capitalist production process. Then, the Proletariat constitutes
itself into Communist Party, clashing with the Capital the Human
Community it foreshadows and from which man is utterly isolated: Human
Being, the genuine Gemeinwesen of man. The Human Community is possible
only after the destruction of the Capital, which can be achieved only by
the Proletariat's dictatorship.

11\. Reaching a real domination, the Capital generalizes the democratic
mystification thanks to which: as revolutionary, it set itself free from
it; as reformist it got developed; as counter-revolutionary it lives on,
starving communism that lies in its womb. The Capital, thus, dissolves
the class struggle into the process of its everlasting accumulation. The
Proletariat as a class is historically wiped out; its praxis is led
astray, then destroyed; the programme of its historical mission is
evacuated; its economic organizations are mastered, and its
revolutionary organ, the Communist Party, destroyed.

12\. The proletariat is revolutionary or it is nothing. During the
historical cycles of the counter-revolutions (1852-1864; 1871-1889;
1906-1912; 1926 -- until the return of the future Communist Party
(subject of the prediction)) -- the Proletariat, apart from the
Communist Programme, is wiped out, reduced to its mere economic
functions. The party of class as a form, splits up, deteriorates, breaks
up and disappears. Until the next formation of the formal party, the
continuity of the Marxist Programme is theoretically maintained by the
faithful elements of the historical party (Marx -- Engels -- Lenin --
The Communist Left of Italy) which have to

a. draw the lesson of the counter-revolution by dismissing the wrong
solutions, such as the immediatist, activist, and the voluntarist ones;

b. restore the body of the Marxist doctrine by the demonstration of its
invariance;

c. forecast and describe the historical genesis of the Communist
Party-to-come reappearing from the catastrophic crisis of the capitalist
system (characteristics, epicentre, date);

d. establish the theoretical, organizational and tactical
characteristics of the working-class's future revolutionary party.

13\. With the counter-revolution, begun in 1919 by the social-democracy,
carried out by fascism and democracy, organized and ruled on a
world-scale by the American imperialism of 1945, supported by Stalinism
edifying capitalism in Russia, fascism carried out the reformist
programme and democracy fulfilled fascism.

14\. Democracy is the solved enigma of all the Constitutions. It creates
the Proletariat's political helplessness and the economic power of the
Capital. All the movements submitted to the political and parliamentary
democracy or to the social and union democracy of the Capital,
constitute the organs of the counter-revolution. Based on the historical
principles of the Capital: Liberty -- Equality -- Fraternity, the
bourgeois, petty-bourgeois and labour democracies carry out by their
actions and their claims the anticommunist programme of the capitalist
domination: which is economically destructive, socially conservative and
politically counter-revolutionary.

15\. The achievement of the counter-revolution, the catastrophic crisis
of the capitalist system and its universal market, will re-create the
class-struggle out of which the Communist Party will be reformed,
world-wide and monolithic.

16\. In the conditions of the Capital's extreme domination, described by
Marx, the labour movement stops organising itself parallel to the
capitalist accumulation process, but reappears from the Capital's
catastrophic crisis, for its violent overthrow and its historical
elimination by the exercise of the Proletariat's dictatorship and the
institution of Socialism. Those conditions have ruined, with the
social-democratic distinction (maximum programme/minimum programme,
based on the liberal phase of the bourgeois domination cycle), the
relative immaturity of the socialist economic conditions, the permanence
of the labour movement, the ancient historical meaning of the economic
and union associations for the defence of the immediate and permanent
interests of the working-class, integrated nowadays to the Capital as
factors of its accumulation, containing the wages, until the communist
struggle for the abolition of the wages, within the limits in keeping
with the laws of the Capital's valorisation.

17\. The class-party is the material strength of the Communist Programme
-- criticism of the political economy, doctrine of the economic, social
and political conditions of the Proletariat's emancipation; theory of
its historical and international praxis; programme, description and
prediction of the Communist classless and stateless society.

* born in 1847 with _The Manifesto of the Communist Party_;

* elaborated by the dialectical materialism in the classical texts of
  the scientific socialism integrating while surpassing the
  critico-utopian communism;

* developed by Marx-Engels for the 1st International of 1864;

* confirmed during the Commune of Paris in 1871 against anarchism;

* defended against reformism by the socialist Lefts in the 2nd
  International of 1889 (Germany, Italy, Russia);

* defended by Lenin against Bernstein's revisionism in 1899 and against
  the social-chauvinism betraying the Sacred Union of 1914;

* triumphs in Russia in 1917 and internationally: in 1919 constitution
  of the Communist International, in 1921 formation of the Italian
  Communist Party stemming from the communist abstentionist fraction of
  the Italian Socialist Party;

* defended by the Communist Left of Italy against the degeneration of
  the 3rd International of 1926 opportunist and tactical first
  (parliamentarism/single-front) then revisionist and
  organizational-programmatic (Bolshevisation/Labour
  government/Socialism in one and single country/Popular
  fronts/Anti-fascist resistance and Sacred Union in the Imperialist war
  of 1939-45/National reconstitution/Legalitarism);

* safeguarded by the Communist Left of Italy against the revisionist
  doubt as far as the foundation of the Marxist revolutionary theory is
  concerned; and

* restored during the counter-revolution by the Communist Left of Italy.

18\. As the indispensable and sole organ of the proletarian
class-struggle for the violent overthrow of the capitalist state and
production mode, the Communist Party organizes and rules the advanced
fraction, radical and conscious of the labour class: the proletariat in
its historical meaning. Founding the real effect of its action on the
historical crisis of the capitalist system, the function of the
communist party is:

a. the defence of the continuity of the Communist Programme and the
invariance of Marxism on the historical axis from the birth in 1847 of
the revolutionary Programme to the Communist society;

b. the prediction, preparation, organization and unification of the
proletarian struggles, in order to guide the revolutionary action of
partial and national movements for fortuitous interests towards general
and world-wide struggles for the historical results of the universal
emancipation of the proletariat, thus of Mankind;

c. the elaboration of a strategic and tactical system both stable and
coherent, with a rational and voluntary dependence of the revolutionary
programme to the historical conditions: since 1871, the phase of the
progressive national war is finished in Europe: since 1919, final
rupture with democracy, parliamentarism and any electoralism whatever;

d. the diffusion of the Marxist theory in the proletarian masses and
specifically in the economic associations and the immediate forms of
organization by and for the revolutionary struggle;

e. the defence of the independence and the continuity of the
organization of the class-party in space and time by the obedience to
the rules of organic centralism assuring the Communist Party as an unity
of structure and movement: refusal of the mechanism of the democratic
centralism; recognition of the Marxist theory as a total and complete
system: no revision or doctrinal enrichment; the Communist Party's
directives are in keeping with the precise limits drawn by the doctrine
and the historical perspective and settled according to the large
historical and geographical subdivisions that determine the fundamental
cycles of the proletarian action, stretching to half-continents and
half-centuries; forbidding to local peripheral groups of the Party to
create programmes and independent movements; unconditional execution of
the unitary and central action; the Party is not defined by an
organization machinery but by its being: the programme; the class-party
foreshadows the Communist Society.

f. the struggle for the transformation of the capitalist system crisis
into a social revolution: the Proletarians have nothing to lose but
their chains and a world to conquer;

g. the proletarian internationalism; appealing to the working classes of
all the countries to avert by civil war -- or to turn into civil war --
any imperialist war: the Proletarians have no homeland;

h. the political organization and the technical direction of the
revolutionary armed insurrection: the insurrection is an art;

i. the institution and exercise of the Proletariat's dictatorship; any
government of the working class can only be the government of the
Communist Party;

Thus, while fighting for the immediate interests and aims of the working
class, the Communists defend and represent, in the present movement, its
future. The Communists have over the rest of the Proletariat the
advantage of the understanding of the conditions, the course and the
general results of the proletarian movement.

19\. The Proletariat is revolutionary in relation to the Bourgeoisie as
soon as it is bound to remove from production the capitalistic nature
that Bourgeoisie wants to perpetuate. Between the capitalist society and
Communism, there is an historical phase of revolutionary transformation
of the former into the latter, to which corresponds a State that cannot
be anything else but the Dictatorship of the Proletariat. With the
revolutionary insurrection -- for which will be settled the secret
organs of the Communist Party's military apparatus -- and after the
overthrow and destruction of the capitalist State, the Proletariat sets
itself up as the dominant class. With its state organs the Communist
Party institutes and exercises its dictatorship:

a. for its despotic intervention in the capitalist relations of
production in order to progressively and systematically destroy them;

b. against any economic, political, social, military and ideological
endeavours of bourgeois and capitalist counter-revolution;

c. for the generalization of a world-wide proletarian revolution, an
essential condition for the victorious institution of Socialism.

20\. In the conditions of the truly proletarian and anti-capitalist
revolution, peculiar to the phase of the Capital's real domination, the
Proletariat is the only revolutionary class, against which the other
classes and social stratas are an indistinguishable or reactionary mass.
The Proletariat achieves its historical mission by itself. The Communist
Party will not exercise its dictatorship indirectly by the machinery of
popular organizations with a majority vocation, such as the pseudo
workers-councils -- thanks to which the historical experience has shown
that the Bourgeoisie could reconquer power, restore its class-domination
and organize the counter-revolution -- but directly: with the exclusion
of any representative democracy apparatus.

The Communist Party do not share power with any other party. The
Communist Party and the Proletarian State hold from the Marxist
Programme and from themselves only their function of the working class's
political and governmental organ.

21\. The Russian soviets were the shape of the democratic proletarians'
and peasants' dictatorship. The Proletarian State is nor Republic nor
working parliament but a work organ. The Proletarian State does not rest
on any Constitution because it is not bound by any law. The Proletarian
State founds the exercise of its absolute and universal power from its
historically transient necessity. The proletarian revolution is not a
matter of form of organization but a matter of Programme: the
functioning of the Communist Party and of the Proletarian State goes
beyond the fetishism of the democratic consultations thanks to which the
Bourgeois State legalizes and conceals the Capital's dictatorship -- by
the domination and the preservation of antagonistic class-divided
society. Communism does not aim at erecting a model State, but at
suppressing the existence of classes and therefore the necessity of any
state whatever: a military organ with bureaucratic framework and with
police screening of the dominant class dictatorship over the dominated
class. The guarantees against its counter-revolutionary elimination, of
which history provided us with two classic examples:

* the Commune of Paris in 1871 knocked down against its wall;

* the progressive political involution in 1926 of the Soviet State
  applying the capitalist social programme of the Russian double
  revolution, economically bourgeois and politically socialist; economic
  victory of the Capital, generalizing its domination to the Slavic
  area; social and political failure of the Proletariat, involved in the
  European defeat of the Communist revolution,

do neither reside in the arrival of providential prophets nor in the
formula of elective mechanisms, conditioned by opinion, number and
arbitrary. The Proletarian State will not decay, provided that the
Communist Party, that rules it, keeps both with the vision of its aim,
the science of its means, and that it maintains its dictatorship for the
deepening and the extension of the proletarian revolution, the
destruction of the capitalist system, in relation with the decline of
the Proletarian State and the emergence of the Communist society. The
revolution will be anonymous or won't be. The proletarian State is the
one that openly asserts the necessity of its dictatorship and its
vanishing as its aim.

22\. Society entering into possession of the production means, the trade
production is wiped out, and by then the domination of the product over
the producer with the following alienation and reification of the human
species. The Communist Party, as the agent of the socialist
transformation of society, gathering the revolutionary avant-garde and
working at pacifically convincing the stratas of non-communist workers
and producers with which and for which Socialism will be instituted,
rules the Proletarian State that, exercising terror on the open agents
of the Capital until their final destruction, economically wiping out
and reducing to political helplessness the ancient petty-bourgeois
classes (partially wiped out by the Capital), and the new middle-stratas
(products of the Capital), executes the organic system of political,
economic, and social measures of the Communist Programme, necessary to
the gradual destruction of the capitalist exploitation regime, the rival
to the progressive emergence of the Communist Society.

### Political Measures

a. Armament of the Proletariat. Settling of communist permanent militias
and creation of the Proletarian State's Red Army.

b. Disarmament of the capitalist class and of its allies.

c. Dissolution of the institutional, economic, judicial and military
organs of the Bourgeois State.

d. Abrogation of the Constitution and the fundamental laws of the
Bourgeois State.

e. Dismissing of all the elected assemblies and abolition of the
universal suffrage.

f. Ban on all the political parties.

g. Ban on the bourgeois and counter-revolutionary trade-unions.

h. Communist management of the working-class partnership in charge of
the implementation and control of the social norms of production and
distribution.

i. Merging of the legislative, executive and judicial powers within the
Proletarian State.

j. Submission of education, information, culture and spare-time to the
State.

k. Establishment of state tribunals to exercise the revolutionary
terror.

l. Ban on cults, secret societies, private associations and leagues and
any anti-social parasitic activities, forms of exploitation man by man.

m. Suppression of the freedom of press and requisition of the propaganda
means.

### Economic Measures

a. Compulsory purchase of the Bourgeoisie. Collectivization of all the
means of production, trade and movement; common land property.

b. Abolition of wages; institution of the work voucher: those vouchers
are not money, they do not circulate. No one can give anything else but
his work. Nothing else but items for the individual consumption can
belong to the individual: within the cooperative society based on the
common property of the production means, the producers don't trade their
products; the work that is applied to them does not show up as the value
of those products. Destruction of the law of value; elimination of the
mercantile monetary aspect of production; physical accounting.

c. Plan of human consumption reducing, reconverting and redeploying the
universal productive forces, a condition for their development and
diversity to come.

d. Rupture of the national and firm limits.

e. Capitalism starves man: policy of a scientific development of
agriculture; recasting of the system of distribution: suppression of
parasitic middle-men.

f. Elimination of the capitalist wasting by a rational use of raw
materials and energy resources applied to the only useful products whose
quantity and quality will be determined according to the genuine needs
of mankind.

### Social Measures

a. Obligation of work for all the members of society. Drastic reduction
of the day's work. Generalization of automation; levelling of
remunerations.

b. Confiscation of land and property ownership from the capital and
Bourgeoisie, that will be given back to and managed by the territorial
authorities of the Proletarian State who will decide on their letting
redistribution.

c. Creation of the collective substructure appropriate for the
institution and practise of life in community; dissolution of the
official link of marriage.

d. Demographic planning. Action of the state for free, compulsory and
periodic health. Socialist orientation of sport against all careerism
whatever.

e. Removability and rotation of functions. Abolition of careers and
titles, of specializations and capitalist forms of the division of
labour.

f. Suppression of the manual work/intellectual work antagonism.

g. Suppression of the town/country antagonism.

h. Socialistic orientation of the scientific policy open to
investigation fields having for criterion security and blooming of man.

i. Pacific integration into the communist evolution of mankind of the
remaining ancestral traditions of the African, American, Asian and
Oceanic peoples.

j. Elimination of the buildings, symbols and representations of the
capital.

k. Search for the development of form of communist creativity.
Realisation of art by suppressing its aspect of specialized activity.

23\. The accomplishment of those measures presupposes an international
and historical phase of struggles, violent and pacific, that will
eliminate both the existence of classes and the necessity of the
political state whose machinery will lie dormant and will confine to the
conscious and rational administration of human activities. The
historically transitional State of the Proletariat will pass away,
freeing the social soul of the proletarian political revolution:
Communism -- a conscious reappropriation of the human being, genuine
Gemeinwesen of man, whose material basis is the historical result of the
system of capitalist production: communism opens the era of its history
to Mankind.

>"From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs!" -
>Marx, 1875.

Redaction 1975, Recast edition 1989.
