---
title: How Socialist Is the Socialist Workers Party?
author: Wildcat
date: 1985
description: A pamphlet attacking the Trotskyist Socialist Workers Party. From <https://web.archive.org/web/20091026195703/http://www.geocities.com/Athens/Acropolis/8195/swp.html>.
...

## Part One: The Nature of the SWP

One of the most significant groups which appears to be outside the orbit
of the Labour Party is the Socialist Workers Party. It is important not
primarily because of its size (though its membership is around 4000),
but more because of the fact that its policies seem credible to many who
have rejected the Labour Party and are committed to bringing about
socialism through working class struggle.

The SWP also has a seemingly clear position that Russia and the Eastern
European countries are state-capitalist, which separates it from all of
the Trotskyist groups. This is reflected in its slogan, "Neither
Washington nor Moscow, but International Socialism."

In terms of political activity, an enormous amount of energy is put in
by members, up and down the country, at workplaces, picket lines,
meetings, selling _Socialist Worker_, and so on. Unfortunately much of
this potentially revolutionary energy is channelled ultimately in the
direction of supporting some of the very institutions which uphold the
present system.

### The Labour Party

The first thing to note is that the SWP considers that both itself and
the Labour Party belong to the same 'working class movement'. Readers of
_Socialist Worker_ are regularly reminded of Labour's record of
attacking the working class. However, this is explained as being due to
either 'mistakes' or 'betrayals' by leaders of a working class party.
The 'mistakes' are committed by left-wing leaders who according to the
SWP, are led to sacrifice their principles through the pursuit of
electoral success. The 'betrayals' are committed by right-wing leaders,
who have become corrupted by the lure of luxury, power and influence
within capitalism.

The fact that _all_ labour leaders become corrupted with monotonous
regularity is explained by their remoteness from the rank and file; and
by their exposure to ruling class ideology through their daily contact
with members of the ruling class in parliament, the civil service, etc.

On the other hand, sometimes the 'failure' of Labour governments is
explained in a slightly different way:

>"Labour government after Labour government has come to power pledged
to carry out thorough going changes in society. Time and again they find
their plans sabotaged by big business and the city." (_Socialist Worker_
17.11.84)

But in any case, the root cause of Labour's failure is "the whole
business of attempting to reform a system incapable of reform." (_SW_
7.12.84) In a word, the Labour Party is the reformist end of the workers
movement, the SWP is the revolutionary end.

However, the SWP reminds us, revolutionaries should also be "the best,
the most determined fighter for reforms ... What is more we wage the
struggle for reforms side by side, arms linked with the reformists."
(_SW_ 24.11.84)

In this way people who join the SWP because of their radical opposition
to the Labour Party, find they have to work arm in arm with the Labour
Party after all.

### State Capitalism

Against the workers movement -- reformist and revolutionary -- is pitted
the state. As _Socialist Worker_ explained to its readers before the
last election:

>"The most powerful and most undemocratic group in our society are
the bosses. They are a tiny group -- a mere 288 people make up the
boards of directors of Britain's top twenty companies, ruling over the
lives of the 1,250,000 people they employ ... The top judges policemen
and army officers -- what we term the state -- rule Britain. They
represent the capitalist system which survives on sweating profits out
of the workers." (_SW_ 11.6.83)

Thus an organisation which is able to see that Russia is
state-capitalist, pretends that Britain is still living in the era of
19th century private capitalism. In fact, state capitalism is well
advanced in Britain as well. The public sector now accounts for about a
third of the British economy. The 'ruling class' therefore includes not
only the boards of directors of large companies, but also leaders of
nationalised industries, directors of public agencies such as the
Manpower Services Commission, heads of department in local government
etc, etc. The state includes not only judges and the police, but also
government ministers, MPs and local councillors _of all parties_; as
well as trade union leaders, and leading figures in education, the
media, and so on.

In the same way, the SWP supports as "thoroughgoing changes in society"
state-capitalist measures, such as nationalisation. As any miner or
steel worker will tell you, nationalisation offers no benefit to the
working class at all. Nor does the SWP's call for "nationalisation with
workers control" make it any better. Nationalised industry is still
capitalist industry. The logic of capitalism leads the bosses of
nationalised industries to attack their workforce like any other bosses.
Experience has shown that 'worker directors' given the job of running
capitalist enterprises are soon transformed into 'worker bureaucrats'.
They become members of the ruling class, 'co-opted' from the working
class, like trade union leaders and many Labour Party politicians.

From this understanding of state-capitalism in modern Britain, it is
easy to see that the Labour Party is _not_ the reformist end of the
workers movement, as the SWP claims. In the past, the Labour Party did
arise from a genuine working class reformist movement. (In fact, a
genuine working class reformist movement is no longer possible, since
capitalism can no longer grant long lasting meaningful reforms. Our aim
must be to destroy world capitalism, not reform it.) But the modern
Labour Party has become an organisation _controlled_ by leaders of the
ruling class, and tightly enmeshed into the structure of the capitalist
state.

So when the SWP fights "arm in arm" with the Labour Party, it is _arm in
arm with the ruling class_.

Of course, socialists must actively support every attempt by workers to
better their living and working conditions. It is also true, as the SWP
says, that revolutions grow out of mass struggle by workers around "some
matter of vital and immediate importance to their lives." (_SW_
24.11.84)

But the joint campaigns with the Labour Party do not relate to mass
working class struggles around vital issues of immediate importance. On
the contrary, when the Labour Party agrees to involve itself in radical
sounding campaigns such as CND or the Anti-Nazi League, the issues and
timing are carefully chosen to ensure that they have no immediate
relevance. The aim of all the demos and meetings is simply to polish up
the radical image of Labour's leaders.

If workers are taken in by these charades, this means that they are less
prepared when, as soon as a struggle arises which _really matters_ --
such as the miners' strike -- Labour leaders put the boot in.

By encouraging militant workers to link arms with the Labour Party in
campaigns, the SWP is not acting as "the best and most determined
fighter for reforms." IT IS ACTIVELY CONTRIBUTING TO THE SABOTAGE OF
FUTURE STRUGGLES BY LABOUR LEADERS.

As the crisis of British capitalism deepens, the success of every
struggle increasingly depends on workers' ability to recognise their
so-called 'reformist leaders' for what they are -- _our enemies_.

### At Election Time ...

The SWP calls on people to "vote Labour without illusions." Yet as we
have seen, its entire strategy is based on maintaining the most
dangerous illusion of all -- that the Labour Party is part of the same
'workers movement' as workers in struggle.

Despite running articles on 'Labour's Lousy accord', the Tories are
still made out to be the root of all evil.

"Cruise missiles and pit closures ... part of the same struggle to beat
the Tories," said _Socialist Worker_ in March 84, forgetting to mention
that Labour's record on-nuclear weapons and pit closures is _even worse_
than the Tories'.

Before the last election, a front page article in _Socialist Worker_ ran
as follows:

>"Another 5 years of Tory government?
>
>Another 5 years of rising unemployment, of savage attacks on the health
service, of squeezed welfare services and soaring arms spending, of
deteriorating inner city areas, of the installation of Trident and
Cruise? The prospect is almost too frightening to contemplate." (_SW_
30.10.82)

In fact, this passage could just as well have been a description of the
1974-79 _Labour_ government. But the SWP didn't say that another Labour
government would be "too frightening to contemplate."

When the labour Party attacks the working class, the SWP says it is
"adopting Tory policies." Just as it described the brutal anti-working
class policies of Mitterrand's 'socialist' government in France as "an
experiment which failed."

Just as when Labour councils attack their employees, _Socialist Worker_
calls it a "Town Hall Tragedy", and calls the Labour bosses, "an
unexpected foe." Just what did they expect?

Just as when Kinnock fails to support the miners, _Socialist Worker_
writes that "_incredibly_ the Tories received a massive boost from Neil
Kinnock." So what's incredible about that?

And so on and on, on every page of every issue of _Socialist Worker_,
the same hypocritical expressions of shock and dismay -- all with the
same aim of _maintaining the illusion_ that workers have the right to
expect something better from 'their' party.

### Trade Unions

The SWP fiercely denounces 'betrayals' by union leaders. These are
chronicled in detail in _Socialist Worker_. What conclusions does the
SWP draw from these experiences?

>"The horizons of trade union leaders are those of trade unionism. Their
role is to negotiate the terms on which workers are exploited. The trade
union bureaucracy will therefore always prefer a compromise, even if it
amounts to a betrayal of their members' interests. Their concern is
always to contain workers struggles, to keep them from escaping the
boundaries of normal collective bargaining.
>
>"It is tempting to conclude from this analysis that the trade union
leaders are a thoroughly reactionary group of people, as bad, if not
worse than the Tories, the bosses and the police. At least Margaret
Thatcher is open about her hostility to workers' struggles, one might
urge." (_SW_ 21.7.84)

It certainly is tempting to draw this conclusion. And in fact this is
the view of the authors of this pamphlet. However, the article
continues:

>"This attitude is mistaken. The trade union leaders are sometimes
compelled, usually against their will, to fight the bosses." (_SW_
21.7.84)

This explains why, although the SWP is one of the leading advocates of
rank and file action, it does not call for rank and file-workers to
control their own struggles. For the SWP, rank and file action has the
limited aim of "forcing the officials to act."

To take just one example, during the residential social workers dispute
at the end of 1983, the SWP said that "the key to winning the
dispute is to put pressure on unions officials and argue the case for
solidarity." (_SW_ 23.12.83)

But just a minute! The fact that union leaders can be drawn into the
fight "against their will" by rank and file action, is hardly a reason
for regarding them in a better light than before. Isn't it likely that
they will turn round and stab their members in the back at the first
opportunity? Of course it is.

Let's see what union leaders think of themselves. Here is an extract
from an internal TUC document, absolutely _not_ publication, which was
leaked by _Socialist Worker_.

Here is an intended \[?\] for

>"Unions are the vehicle for winning consent by \[?\] individuals as
workers for policies that employers and governments wish to pursue and
that need the cooperation of workers if they are to succeed. Proper
collective bargaining is the way to maximise efficiency and win
acceptance of technological change and some of the more radical
proposals needed to improve productivity." Despite all the Tory attacks,
the document continues, "the government has been unable to remove the
trade unions entirely from playing a role in the state." (_SW_ 28.1.84)

This document makes it crystal clear that the union leaders don't see
their role as one of leading workers in struggle. They see their role as
one of persuading their members to accept whatever unpalatable measures
the bosses and the government wish to impose on them. They see their
role as part of the state, as part of the _ruling class_.

This is not to say that every branch secretary or shop steward is part
of the ruling class. Many of them try to defend their members'
interests. Nevertheless there is a tendency for all union officials,
even local ones, to be absorbed into the ranks of the state. The union
organisation described here by a S Yorkshire bus worker is typical:

>"The union leadership is bureaucratic and bunkered. The network of
privileges, the complex procedures and round of meetings -- all in paid
time for the stewards -- plus the full-timers in the union office next
to personnel, all comprise to make the leadership lethargic and
management-minded. Votes to cut overtime, collect money for the miners
or whatever, are ignored as management don't agree with them and won't
pay stewards to organise them." (_SW_ 30.6.84)

The TUC document also shows the real reason why union leaders oppose the
new union laws. Union leaders have already shown that they are prepared
to use the new laws to SWP press unofficial actions. NALGO, the AUEW and
EEPTU have all refused to support strikes by their members because
without a ballot they are illegal NALGO leaders even called the police
to disperse an illegal picket by their own members outside a union
conference. What union leaders object to is that the new laws also
attempt to downgrade _their own_ power and influence within the state.

Their response to the new laws has been twofold. Firstly, they attempt
to organise their members in set-piece campaigns to 'defend the unions.'
Secondly, wherever their members embark on struggles to defend their own
vital interests, such as pay and jobs, the union leaders try their
utmost to demonstrate their value to the state ... as strike-breakers.

In this situation, it follows that union leaders' 'support' for a
struggle is like the kiss of death.

_Socialist Worker_ is quite happy to play along with the union leaders'
double-crossing strategy. The front pages call on workers to DEFEND THE
UNIONS, on the grounds that "what is at stake is no less than the
ability of workers to direct and control their own organisations." (_SW_
7.12.84)

Meanwhile, on the inside back pages, example after example of struggles
defeated by union leaders' sabotage shows that _workers have already
lost control of the unions_. This does not prevent the SWP from
continuing to advocate the disastrous strategy of forcing union leaders
to fight "against their will."

Following the strategy recommended by the SWP, militant residential
social workers went to extraordinary lengths to persuade their union
leaders to act. Finally, by invading a union conference, they managed to
get the union leaders to promise to step up the action. These promises
were not carried out by the union leaders. But their effect was to lull
rank and file members into a false sense of security that their leaders
were organising the struggle for them.

By raising false hopes of this kind, the SWP's tactics prevent militant
workers from seeing the need to take matters into their own hands, by
appealing directly to their fellow workers for a struggle organised by
workers themselves _against_ the union leaders.

### Breaking from Trade Unionism

The basis of trade unionism is, to use the words of the SWP, to
negotiate the terms on which workers are exploited. In other words the
traditions of trade unionism are based on compromise.

But the crisis of capitalism means that increasingly no compromise is
possible between workers and bosses. In this situation, union
traditions, based on compromise, are no use and a recipe for defeat. New
forms of struggle are required which respond to the necessity for
all-out-confrontation with the bosses. They are necessary not only to
win day-to-day struggles to defend living conditions; but also to
prepare the ground for the revolutionary confrontation which will
provide the only lasting solution to the capitalist crisis by abolishing
capitalism once and for all.

The chief differences between the new forms of struggle required and the
old trade union traditions are as follows.

Firstly, the trade union tradition of striking for a fixed set of
'reasonable' demands will have to be abandoned. Instead workers should
aim to raise and widen their demands during the course of the struggle;
not only to reflect the growing power of their movement, but also to
encourage other workers to join the fight.

Secondly, right from the start, workers will have to unite across the
divisions of trade and industry embodied in trade unionism.

Thirdly, _all_ aspects of the struggle will have to be directly
controlled by _all_ workers involved in the struggles through regular
mass meetings and a system of recallable delegates. An all-out
confrontation with the bosses can only be won if every worker is
actively involved.

This means not only getting rid of today's treacherous leaders, but
rejecting the whole trade union tradition of allowing leaders to
organise 'on behalf of' a passive membership.

In countries where trade union traditions are less strong than in
Britain, above all in Poland in 1980, workers have already engaged in
struggles of this kind -- in MASS STRIKES which have struck terror into
the hearts of the ruling class across the world.

### The SWP inside the unions

By contrast, the rank and file activity advocated by the SWP remains
_wholly within_ the traditions of trade unionism.

Sometimes the SWP calls for rank and file control of picketing. But it
never questions the union-leaders' right to carry out negotiations; nor
their right to say what the demands of the strike should be.

The SWP calls on rank and file workers to organise traditional trade
union solidarity actions, such as blacking and collections. But it never
goes further than this by calling on workers to seek _active solidarity_
in mass strike action which unites workers across union divisions in the
same struggle.

Should rank and file workers wish to influence matters of policy of this
kind, the SWP encourages them to follow the complex procedures set down
in the rule books -- with disastrous results.

A recent issue of _Socialist Worker_ described how SWP members at
Longbridge attempted to pass a resolution at a union branch meeting
urging support for the miners, and linking this to action over their own
current pay claim. An excellent idea -- but the convenor simply ruled
their resolution out of order.

By contrast SWP NALGO members in Bolton did manage to get a motion
passed at a union meeting instructing officials to call meetings to step
up the action being taken by nursery nurses there. Success? Not quite.
The following weeks' issue of _Socialist Worker_ complained that "branch
officers have refused to call section meetings despite being instructed
to do so." What a surprise.

Faced with setbacks of this kind, it is tempting to suppose that things
would be better with a new set of leaders. The alternative to right-wing
union leaders is provided by the 'broad left' which organises inside the
unions with the aim of electing left-wing officials. _Socialist Worker_
provides ample evidence that 'broad left' union leaders are just as good
at sabotaging struggles as right-wing ones. The latest example is Jimmy
Knapp, the left-wing successor to Sid Weighell in the NUR, who has
surely earned a knighthood by his heroic efforts to stop the miners'
strike spreading to the railways. Despite this, the SWP continues to
insist that socialists "cannot be neutral" in elections for union
officials, and should support broad left candidates like Jimmy Knapp.
Their justification for this is that:

>"an electoral victory for the left could act as a powerful fillip
for rank and file militancy. To vote for the left is to challenge the
prevailing ideas of Thatcher's Britain." (_SW_ 22.9.84)

In other words because workers have _illusions_ in the possibility of
reforming the unions by electing left-wing leaders, the SWP doesn't
wants to shatter these illusions -- even though it knows that the new
left-wing leader will almost certainly be just as bad as the old
right-wing one.

### Is the SWP really socialist?

Many people join the SWP because it seems to offer a radical alternative
to the traditional left. In practice they find that such a radical
alternative cannot be developed within the SWP. At every step they are
led back into the arms of the labour Party and the union leaders.

It is not remarkable that over the years, despite its growth, the SWP
has lost a great many of its members.

How are the apparent contradictions in the SWP's politics to be
explained?

When the forerunner of the SWP, the International Socialism group, first
started out in the 60s, it was more open minded than many other
organisations of the left. It represented a fairly conscious attempt to
overcome the limitations of the politics of the Trotskyist 'Fourth
International', and the ideas of Trotsky that lay behind them. This
enabled it to break from the Trotskyist theory that Russia was a
'workers state'. It was also able to acknowledge the reality of the
post-war boom and understand the importance of its effects upon working
class consciousness and organisation. Traditional Trotskyist groups were
still peddling the belief that world economic collapse was just around
the corner.

The year 1968 seems to have signalled the failure of IS to overcome
these limitations. It set the seal on the gradual slip back into the
Trotskyist tradition by IS over the proceeding years. Maybe this was due
to the events of May 1968 in France, and the appeal provided by the
sudden swelling of the ranks of IS with eager militant youth, awaiting
political action. But whatever the reason, it is clear that after about
1970 the leadership adopted a party building style that left little room
for the theoretical questioning of the prior period, As a result, all
activity within IS became orientated towards recruitment, and this has
continued unabated ever since. It is the same story no matter what area
or activity is considered: _principles_ have been subordinated to
_tactics_ for getting more people into the organisation.

The SWP's support for the Labour Party and the unions is thus
_tactical_.

Firstly, to openly call for workers to break from Labour and the unions
would not be popular among militant workers. So using the excuse that
"the party must not lose touch with the masses," the SWP advances what
it hopes will be more popular views -- which _it knows_ however are not
only wrong, but disastrously wrong.

Secondly, the SWP needs the continued goodwill of labour and union
leaders. It needs to be able to work inside the unions and the Labour
Party in order to launch its party-building campaigns.

Labour and union leaders are happy to accept the SWP as a 'ginger group'
inside the left. The SWP gives enthusiastic young activists the chance
to let off a bit of steam, but does not encourage theoretical
questioning and always, in the end, tells them to vote Labour and defend
the unions. (I remember discussing the Labour Party with two young SWP
members in the late 70s, and being told by the local SWP leader, "don't
bother talking to them, all they're interested in is beating up
fascists.")

The SWP claims that the aim of campaigns such as the 'Right to Work
Campaign' is to win reforms through mass action. Secretly, the SWP knows
that no such 'right to work' can exist under capitalism. The 'right to
work' is in fact an example of a Trotskyist _transitional demand_. The
idea behind transitional demands is that by leading people into a fight
for demands which are impossible under capitalism, they will **see** the
need for socialism. In other words, by hitting their heads against a
brick wall for them, people will have their eyes opened. The underlying
contempt is clear.

It was in 1977 that the IS was renamed the Socialist Workers Party. By
this time the demands of maintaining a structure that would build the
party meant that there could be no discussion that challenged its
theoretical foundations. It could only respond by becoming less
democratic. A number of small groups were ejected in the mid 70s, and
many individuals left of their own accord. In 1971 IS theorist D. Hallas
had written that the type of revolutionary party advocated by IS "cannot
be created except on a thoroughly democratic basis; unless in its
internal life vigorous controversy is the rule and various tendencies
and shades of opinion represented." This theory conflicted heavily with
the experience of many who eventually left the party, and often became
disillusioned with revolutionary politics altogether,

And what is the party being built for? Well they may not explicitly
state it, but they believe that the party must seize power _on behalf
of_ the working class.

And here is the third reason why the SWP calls for limited rank and file
independence from their leaders. It sees itself as a future leadership,
and doesn't want rank and file workers to get _too_ independent, in case
they get the idea they could do without a specialised leadership
altogether.

For us today, the possibility that the SWP will seize power seems
absurdly unlikely. But this doesn't mean that we should ignore their
ideas. The choice between a policy of 'all power to the working class'
and one of 'all power to the revolutionary party', will be as
fundamental tomorrow as it was in 1917.

The lesson of the history of the SWP, is that those who claim to be
revolutionaries must break theoretically and practically with _all_
forms of ruling class ideology if they are not to become an obstacle to
the working class movement.

## Part Two: The SWP and the Miners

As might have been expected, the SWP's line on the miners' strike has
twisted and turned from week to week, or even from page to page of the
same issue of _Socialist Worker_, with bewildering speed. Overall
however, during the strike, the SWP has moved dramatically to the right.

At the start of the strike the SWP announced that rank and file action
was the key to victory:

>"The miners can win _if_ the rank and file of the union mounts
picketing on a scale even larger than in 1972, and if other groups of
workers are able to by-pass their leaders and stop the movement of coal
... Let's insist on strike Committees elected by activists." (_SW_
21.4.84)

This call for rank and file control of the strike was not repeated
however. The SWP pulled back from a position which would have led them
into outright opposition to the union bureaucracies. Instead, as usual,
it attempted to steer a middle course between the union leaders and
militant activists.

Following the mass pickets at Orgreave this became much more difficult.
Almost the entire NUM leadership, apart from Scargill, opposed the mass
pickets and took steps to ensure that they could not happen again. In
particular, the sequestration of NUM funds was used as an excuse to
withdraw funds, transport and other facilities from the pickets. Now,
the NUM had had enough foresight to transfer most of its funds out of
the country before sequestration. Clearly, had they wanted to, NUM
leaders could also have planned in advance to ensure that mass pickets
could continue despite sequestration. (This did happen in Lancashire.
But the strike there was _not_ run by the anti-strike area NUM, but by
branch officials and activists from the most militant pit, Bold.)

The SWP later claimed that Orgreave had shown that "area bureaucracies
were able to block the scale of mobilisations necessary for effective
mass picketting."(_SW_ 3.11.84) In fact, what Orgreave really showed was
that effective mass picketting was impossible unless militant miners
seized control of the strike from the NUM. Obviously this would be no
easy task. Moreover, any organisation that made this call would not be
well received by many of the most militant miners, who remained fiercely
loyal to the NUM, despite the fact it was sabotaging their efforts to
win the strike. The SWP was not prepared to risk this unpopularity.

What Orgreave showed, in other words, was that there was no more
political capital to be made by the SWP by focussing on the issue of
mass picketting. After some hesitation, the SWP transferred its
energies to the miners' support committees. In a dramatic 'Appeal to
Organisations of the Labour Left' it called on them to 'build united
support' for the miners. (_SW_ 20.10.84)

The justification for this new line had already been prepared some weeks
earlier. On 15th September _Socialist Worker_ had announced a 'new
phase' of the strike with the headline "ONTO THE DEFENSIVE". In fact
there was no major change in the situation of the strike at this time.
Unrest in the car plants and local-councils meant that there was
probably as good, if not better chance of the strike developing into a
wider class movement as there ever had been. The SWP'S 'new phase'
referred not to the needs of the strike, but to the interests of the
SWP.

Many rank and file SWP members undoubtedly sensed they were being asked
to betray the principles they thought their organisation stood for. The
leadership criticised their "one-sided development" and told them they
had to learn to work with people are not revolutionaries in order to
"draw some of them closer to our ideas." (_SW_ 3.11.84)

In other words, by watering down its politics, the SWP hoped to poach a
few members from the Labour left. (Predictably the SWP's activity in the
support committees has generally been limited to trying to take them
over.)

In the light of this weak-kneed opportunism, the SWP's criticism of the
labour Party as 'sacrificing its principles for th sake of electoral
success' rings rather hollow. So does its criticism of Scargill for
"failing to explain openly and clearly to the members that they could
only win if they intervened effectively to take control of the strike
from complacent area leaderships and unenthusiastic branch committees."
(_SW_ 2.2.85)

But if he won't, the SWP should have added, neither will we!

Readers who agreed with this criticism of Scargill for failing to call
for rank and file control of the strike, which appeared on page 5 of
_Socialist Worker_ dated 2.2.85, may have been surprised to read on page
10 of the same issue a major policy statement which stated bluntly that
calls for a rank and file movement were "not relevant in an operative
sense". This article puts the official seal of approval on the SWP's
shift right during the strike. Furthermore, it marks the final
abandonment by the SWP of its long term aim of building the party
through an independent rank and file movement. SWP members are
instructed to work inside union branches (even though "we know most of
them are shells"), to attempt to recruit members there.

### The SWP and the TUC

The consequences of attempting to work through the unions can be seen in
the SWP's attitude to the TUC. Before the 1984 Trades Union Congress the
SWP warned miners that 'token support' was the most they could expect:

>"The TUC refused to back the firemens' strike in 1977, it failed to
deliver solidarity to the steel workers' strike in 1980, it ordered the
train drivers to call off their strike in 1982 and it refused to back
the NGA last December." It will be up to activists to translate the
words of any resolution into deeds, they concluded. (_SW_ 1.9.84)

But one week later, the words of caution were forgotten as _Socialist
Worker_ euphorically declared:

>"The TUC resolution in support of the miners can open the way to
>victory in the coal strike." (_SW_ 8.9.84)

The bosses' magazine, the _Economist_, took a rather different view of
the TUC's aim in declaring its 'support' for the strike:

>"Mr Scargill's defeat will come from within the union movement itself.
The TUC took the first shambling steps towards this when its moderate
executive gathered the miners into the bear hug of 'total support'"
(quoted in _SW_ 15.9.34)

And the _Economist_ could quote Len Murray in support of its opinion:

>"The purpose of the procedures set out in the statement is to devise
arrangements to make the dispute more effective, and to _make mass
picketting unnecessary_." (quoted in _SW_ 8.9.84)

Despite printing these warnings in _Socialist Worker_, the SWP still
pretended to be surprised when, several weeks later, the TUC's promises
of support had not materialised:

>"7 weeks ago the TUC pledged that they would not allow the miners
to go down to defeat ... Now is the time for these pledges to be
redeemed." (_SW_ 20.10.84)

As the weeks lengthened into months

>"More than two months after the TUC, the general council has yet to
issue a leaflet or poster urging trade unionists to back the miners."
(_SW_ 17.11.84)

... and so on and on ...

>"It is almost three months since the TUC Congress pledged full support
for the miners ... TUC leaders should be campaigning day in and day out
among their members for action ..." (_SW_ 24.11.84)

Oh come on comrades, this really is too much:

>"**TUC, GET OFF YOUR KNEES**." (_SW_ 7.12.84)

What about the SWP's call for activists to 'translate the words of any
TUC resolution into deeds'? Well sorry ... what we really meant was that
activists should _ask TUC leaders_ to translate the words of their
resolutions into deeds. In other words, its just the same tired old
Trotskyist call to 'force the leaders to act' after all:

>"**What You Can Do**
>
>"... Send a flood of resolutions to union executives and the TUC
general council demanding full support for the NUM. Insist the TUC
launches a massive campaign in support of the strike ..." (_SW_
17.12.84)

All this would be comical if it wasn't so serious. The belief that
solidarity for the miners can be organised through the TUC is one of the
most important causes of the weakness of the strike. By adding its
'radical' support to this illusion the SWP is helping to defeat the
strike.

### Working through the unions

Undoubtedly the level of independent rank and file organisation during
the miners' strike has been quite low -- lower than in several other
major strikes over the past decade. Nevertheless a substantial minority
of mantis \[?\] have begun to question trade union traditions. What is
actually shown here is that militant workers need to traditions to
challenge the stranglehold of the union bureaucrats over the strike.
Having decided that talk of a rank and file movement is 'not relevant in
an operative sense', the SWP has advised these militants to work through
the unions, The results of this can be seen in this example from
Yorkshire:

>"In our pit, we pulled a few of the lads who'd been arrested together.
I managed to pull three lads round me and we start to go round knocking
on doors and had some success in getting people out.
>
>Then we put a resolution to the branch. It said that we should get a
list of everyone's name and address who has been arrested and can't go
out picketting, and form them into recruitment teams. We should also get
a list of everyone who's been passive, and then the recruiting teams
could visit them.
>
>Unfortunately this was not passed by the branch committee -- you
have to put a resolution through the branch committee and this had got
knocked back -- but it still had to go through correspondence.
>
>So the week before it was due to cone up we went round the soup
kitchen, asking lads to come to the meeting. We got 150 to the branch
meeting where we usually get 35. The branch president refused to admit
the correspondence so I got up and asked what had happened to it. He
said he didn't know anything about a letter and threatened to put me
through a window.
>
>But the lads who had come to the meeting spoke up for me, so the branch
president asked them if they wanted to hear the letter. Much to his
surprise they all shouted yes.
>
>It just shows what an advantage we have got over the officials. We work
with the rank and file day in and day out, while our branch president is
up there in the area office in Barnsley an is so out of touch its
unbelievable.
>
>So I explained the case, how we must step up picketting if we to win
the strike and moved a resolution condemning the branch committee for
not supporting such a necessary step.
>
>I got a big cheer for this, but they had a fall-back and ruled it out
of order. I think that shows we've got to know the rule book and how
we've got to intervene." (_SW_ 15.9.84)

What is actually shown here is that militant workers need to _tear up_
the union rule book. Instead of waiting weeks for proposed actions to be
passed through union branches, these miners should have organised the
recruiting teams themselves and _ignored_ whatever the NUM tried to do
to stop them.

### Rank and File Activity

The type of rank and file organisation the SWP called for at the start
of the strike has existed. Take this example, again from the same issue
of _Socialist Worker_ that declared that talk of a rank and file
movement was 'not relevant in an operative sense':

>"In some parts of the Scottish coalfields, scabbing has been kept
right down. For example there are only 34 scabs in the whole of the
4,000 strong Longannet complex.
>
>The strike is solid because of the strength of their organisation.
There are 15 villages in the area with their own strike centres. Nearly
all hold two or three meetings a week to discuss the strike. In addition
they have a weekly meeting attended by two or three delegates from each
centre to co-ordinate picketing. There is a feeling of involvement.
About 257 of the men are actively supporting the strike through
picketing, delegation work to raise money and support and maintaining
the strike centres and kitchens." (_SW_ 2.2.85)

Attempts by workers to directly control their own struggles in this way,
although modest and limited in themselves, are important. Reproduced on
a much greater scale, uniting workers across union divisions, this will
be the form of a mass workers' movement which can move onto the
offensive against capitalism. But this example from Longannet is not
what the SWP means when it talks about a 'rank and file movement'. They
mean a tightly organised pressure group within the union organised _by
and for_ the SWP. This is what they have decided is 'not relevant in an
operative sense'. This is why, instead of trying to spread the example
of Longannet and help win the strike, they have sent their members into
the union branches to build the SWP.

The SWP has also shown a conspicuous lack of interest in the two areas
of activity which have been the focus for the most radical activity
during the strike: women's organisation and the 'hit squads.'

Miners have seen the need to meet state violence with their own
violence. Organised in a paramilitary fashion, working in
semi-clandestinity, the 'hit squads' have attacked NCB installations,
scab firms and strikebreakers. Workers in some pit villages have
organised attacks on the police. This is one of the most important gains
of the strike. It marks a practical break with the peaceful traditions
of trade unionism. It marks the recognition of the need for all-out
class war against the bosses.

The SWP condemns the activities of the 'hit squads' as "individual acts
of violence" which "can very easily endanger the strike". (_SW_ 2.6.34)
However the actions of the 'hit squads' are not individual acts. They
are organised secretly of necessity. But they are supported by militant
activists as essential back up for more traditional actions such as
picketing

The truth is that the straightforward, practical violence of the 'hit
squads' is simply too revolutionary for the SWP.

Like the actions of the 'hit squads', the powerful women's movement
which has arisen during the strike cannot be contained within radical
trade unionism. Women activists don't want to be kept in the kitchens.
They want to be on the picket lines. But more than this, _they want a
say in the running of the strike_. This demand challenges the very heart
of trade unionism. For once you let miners' wives on to the strike
committees, a principle is established. Once non-miners are allowed to
participate fully in the strike, the way is open for more and more
people to be drawn into the struggle -- until what you have is no longer
a trade union dispute, but a _mass_ strike. Clearly in this situation
the union leaders lose any special claim to authority.

The union leaders recognise this threat to their power. They are afraid
of women activists who bluntly refuse to do what they tell them. No
wonder they tell the women to 'get back to the kitchens'.

As for the SWP, it tries to steer clear of such controversial issues,
and prefers to emphasise the importance of the kitchens, and "money,
turkeys and toys". (see _Socialist Review_, Jan 85).

### Where now for the SWP?

The above examples show the problem now faced by the SWP. The SWP rose
to prominence through support for rank and file struggles which,
although _formally_ outside official union control, had aims and methods
which were wholly compatible with trade unionism. These struggles
reflected the power of shop floor workers in a healthy capitalist
economy.

Today the situation is completely different. Capitalism is in crisis and
the struggle is a desperate one. Rank and file activity in the miners
strike has never reached the stage of formal independence from the
officials. But in practice its aims and methods, potentially at least,
go _far beyond_ the limits of trade unionism. The experience of the
miners strike shows that the transformation from union dispute to
revolutionary struggle will not occur via the SWP's half-baked
rank-and-filism. If it occurs -- it will happen all at once as workers
respond to the practical needs of their struggle.

The middle ground on which the SWP stands is sinking beneath it. No
organisation appears to have lost more during the strike than the SWP;
and it is hard to see how they can successfully transfer their activity
to the union branches, where the Labour left organisations are already
in control. Revolutionaries should not mourn the fate of the SWP.
Instead they should boldly declare that rank and file activists should
not aim to reform the unions. They should set their sights on the _class
war_ which will meet state violence with organised workers' violence,
unite workers employed and unemployed, in all unions and no union,
replace the power of the union bureaucrats with the power of the
workers' mass assemblies, and destroy the unions along with all the
other institutions of present day society.
