---
title: How to Explain a "Transitional Program" to a Simple Worker
author: Workers League for a Revolutionary Party
date: 1946
description: Published in the September-October 1946 issue of the Bulletin of the Workers League for a Revolutionary Party, formerly the Leninist League, who were also known as the "Marlenites" after their leader, George Marlen. They were virulently anti-Trotskyist even though they were a split from the Revolutionary Workers League, which itself had split from official Trotskyism. From <https://www.marxists.org/history/etol/newspape/in-defense-bolshevism/v09n04-sep-oct-1946-Bulletin-of-Leninist-L-Spiro.pdf>.
...

A TROTSKYITE: I belong to the Socialist Workers Party, the Trotskyite
Party.

A WORKER: I'm for the Democratic Party.

Trotskyite: You shouldn't be. The Democratic Party does not serve your
interests.

Worker: What party should I be for?

Trotskyite: A Labor Party.

Worker: Are you also for a Labor Party?

Trotskyite: Yes, naturally.

Worker: But you just said you belong to the Trotskyite Party. Is that
the Labor Party you mentioned?

Trotskyite: No, the Trotskyite Party is different, it stands for
proletarian revolution and socialism.

Worker: Is a Labor Party also for what you call proletarian revolution
and socialism?

Trotskyite: Well, no, not exactly.

Worker: But you are for proletarian revolution and socialism.

Trotskyite: Yes, of course,

Worker: Then why are **you** for a Labor Party?

Trotskyite: You see, I'm for a Labor Party because **you** are for the
Democratic Party. You have to get promoted politically, so to speak. For
you to be for a Labor Party would be an advance.

Worker: Let me get this straight. A Labor Party does not stand for the
proletarian revolution and socialism you say you stand for, but for me
it would be an advance to be for a Labor Party.

Trotskyite: That's about the size of it. We're trying to raise the
political level of the working class in general by elevating the workers
to being for a Labor Party.

Worker: Now, let me ask you this. Since this Labor Party is not for
proletarian revolution and socialism, would you say that it is in my
interests?

Trotskyite: Naturally, we're very critical toward the Labor Party. We
don't say point blank that it would directly serve the workers'
interests. But it would be a stage toward proletarian revolution and
socialism.

Worker: Should I have been for a Labor Party government in the British
elections last year?

Trotskyite: Yes, of course.

Worker: Then you would have wanted me, that is, the workers to vote for
the British Labor Party.

Trotskyite: Definitely. We told the workers to vote for Attlee, Bevin
and the other British Laborites.

Worker: Ah, now I understand. The British Labor Party is the kind of
Labor Party you want me to be for.

Trotskyite: Oh, no! The British Labor Party is a rotten sell-out party,
has been for years.

Worker: But still you wanted me to vote for it. Maybe I don't
understand, after all.

Trotskyite: It's this way. When you're for the Democratic Party, then to
change to being for a Labor Party is an advance for you, even though
that Labor Party sells you down the river just the same as the
Democratic Party.

Worker: Would you have voted for the British Labor Party?

Trotskyite: Yes, that's our line.

Worker: But you knew all along that the Labor Party sells out the
workers and has been doing so for a long time.

Trotskyite: Naturally.

Worker: Still, you would have voted for it. Mighty peculiar. Wouldn't it
be simpler just to tell me that the Labor Party is a sell-out party and
that it would be foolish for me to support it?

Trotskyite: No, first we try to get you to support what is against your
interests because it is in your interests to take that step.

Worker: By the way, what do you think of the British Labor Party
government?

Trotskyite: It's betraying the workers all down the line. Look at the
way the British imperialists are murdering the workers of India and
Palestine. That scoundrel, Attlee, tries to justify such crimes.

Worker: But since the Labor Party government is betraying the workers
all down the line, as you yourself say, I can't for the life of me
understand why I should have voted for the Labor Party.

Trotskyite: Because you are not for a Labor Party yet. If you voted for
it, that would be an advance for you.

Worker: But what about the workers of India and Palestine who are being
murdered by the British Labor government troops? How would the workers
in those places feel toward me if I helped to elect such a government?
You say I have to get advanced to being for a Labor Party, but wouldn't
the workers of India and Palestine have a sneaking suspicion that when I
supported the Labor Party I was advancing over their dead bodies?

Trotskyite: Perhaps, but when you would see those workers being murdered
by Attlee and Bevin's troops, then you would become disillusioned even
with the Labor Party, you would move more to the Left, and that would be
a still better advance for you.

Worker: Maybe so, but that wouldn't wash the blood of those workers off
my hands which helped to elect the Labor government. I still say it
would be simpler for you just to warn me beforehand that the Laborites
are scoundrels and that I should **not** vote them into office.

Trotskyite: Politics are pretty complicated. We also advocate the
formation of a Stalinist-Socialist coalition government in France,
England, Italy, and so forth. That's our Trotskyite Transitional
Program.

Worker: Is that a government in the interests of the workers?

Trotskyite: Well, it's on the basis of capitalism, and the Stalinist
Communists and the Socialists certainly don't serve the interests of the
workers.

Worker: Therefore I may assume that a Stalinist-Socialist coalition
government will also sell me down the river.

Trotskyite: We don't say point blank that a Labor Party government or a
Stalinist-Socialist coalition government would be against the interests
of the workers. Concretely, such governments sell out the workers, but
historically, they do them a lot of good because they expose themselves
before the workers and so help them move more to the Left.

Worker: I my seem narrow-minded, but it's very queer to advocate the
formation of any government which would sell out the workers, as you say
these governments would.

Trotskyite: Mass pressure might compel the Laborites, Stalinists and
Socialists who form a government to pass acts benefiting the workers,
though I'll admit there's not too much chance of this.

Worker: What does it all boil down to? If these parties in the
government improved my living conditions, I would support **them**. If
they did me harm, then **you** would be in the position of having
advocated a government which acted against my interests, and I would
hold you responsible. In any case, your Trotskyite Party wouldn't cut
much ice with me. Anybody who helps put a government which injures me
is no friend of mine.

Trotskyite: Our Transitional Program will get clearer to you when you
think it over. Take a simpler case. We supported the Stalinist
bureaucrat, Ben Davis, in New York in the election same time back,

Worker: I don't believe it!

Trotskyite: I can prove it. Here's our paper, THE MILITANT, where it
says that the workers should vote for Ben Davis "because he is a Negro
candidate on the ticket of a working class party."

Worker: Wasn't he on the ticket of the Communist Party, the Stalinists,
as you call them, the betrayers of labor?

Trotskyite: Yes.

Worker: And the Stalinist Communist Party is also a working class party?

Trotskyite: Yes, our paper, THE MILITANT, says so here, black on white.

Worker: Just a moment, I'm getting pretty dizzy. In the few minutes
we've been talking, you've thrown no fewer than three working class
parties at me, the Trotskyite Party, the Labor Party and the Stalinist
Party. Two of these you already have told me betray the interests of the
workers. I take it that you consider your Trotskyite Party is loyal to
the workers. Yet the two betrayers and the one faithful all seem to be
working class parties, according to your reckoning. Do you want me to be
for the Stalinist Party, also? Do you want me to be for all three
working class parties at once?

Trotskyite: No, we don't want you to be for the Stalinist Party, we just
wanted the workers to vote for its candidate.

Worker: Is there a difference? If I vote for a candidate, it's because
I'm for his party, and if I'm for a party, I vote for its candidates. I
don't do any fancy bookkeeping in these matters.

Trotskyite: Of course, there's the point that Davis was a NEGRO
candidate, and --

Worker: Now don't go bringing up the man's race. I'm not so stupid that
I'd vote for a man because of the color of his skin. You yourself just
told me this Davis was a Stalinist candidate. I should guess from that
you don't consider him exactly an angel.

Trotskyite: Oh, he's a Stalinist rat, no doubt.

Worker: Still, I should have voted for him.

Trotskyite: Yes, definitely, as a NEGRO candidate of a working class
party.

Worker: You know, if I actually voted for this list of rats, scoundrels
and betrayers you've been pushing at me, I'd have to take out my
conscience and fumigate it. You look like a nice fellow, but you
certainly have a queer way of going about urging people to keep company
at the polls with the smelliest assortment of human tripe.

Trotskyite: It's part of our campaign to raise the level of the workers.

Worker: What makes THE MILITANT say the Stalinist Party is a working
class party? Is it for the workers?

Trotskyite: Oh, no, it's against the interests of the workers.

Worker: Here we go again. If the Stalinist Party is against the
interests of the workers, how is it a working class party?

Trotskyite: We mean that many workers support it.

Worker: Well, I'm sure that more workers support the Democratic Party
than the Stalinist Party; that makes the Democratic Party also a working
class party. That would be four working class parties in one afternoon.

Trotskyite: No, of course, the Democratic Party is not a working class
party. The fact that many workers support it is not the point. Tho
Stalinist Party pretends to be a working class party, and many workers
fall for it.

Worker: Don't tell me its **pretenses** make it a working class party.

Trotskyite: Naturally not. The point is that many workers **think** it's
a working class party.

Worker: I see, you mean that the workers' **confusion** makes it a
working class party.

Trotskyite: In a strictly scientific sense, the Stalinist Party is not a
working class party because its policies betray the workers.
Fundamentally, it's an anti-working class Party.

Worker: But your paper, THE MILITANT, said plainly that the workers
should vote for Davis because he was a Negro candidate of a working
class party. That was one of the reasons your paper gave for voting for
Davis. Well, anyway, it's clear the workers wouldn't vote for Davis if
they were convinced he represents an anti-working class Party. That
would certainly be stupid electioneering, from Davis' standpoint. I'll
bet he also told the workers he's the candidate of a working class
party.

Trotskyite: Well, of course, he's a liar. That is, I mean --

Worker: I see what you mean. He's a liar, but THE MILITANT has a
Transitional Program. Are there any more working class parties?

Trotskyite: Well, the Trotskyite Party was discussing uniting with
Shachtman's Workers Party.

Worker: What, another one! Who are these guys?

Trotskyite: Oh, a gang of petty-bourgeois revisionists, we call them.
Their outfit is strictly no good.

Worker: But you were discussing uniting with them? I don't get it.

Trotskyite: There was nothing definite. We were just discussing. Our
leader, Comrade Cannon, was communicating with them about it.

Worker: If they're no good, why talk about uniting with them? I wouldn't
unite with a bunch of no-goods. I wouldn't even discuss it.

Trotskyite: In politics it's very complicated. Today you break with
people because they're rotten renegades, but tomorrow you may unite with
them. That's the dialectical development of history.

Worker: Very interesting. I wouldn't have thought it possible.

Trotskyite: Yes, as Comrade Cannon said in his history of our Party --
with us, nothing is impossible.

Worker: I must admit your Transitional Program is quite beyond me. A
fellow like me would never support anybody he knows are a pack of
fakers, like you know the Stalinist leaders are, and he would never tell
others to vote for them. When I know any party is my enemy, I'm against
it, plain and simple. However, as they say, where there's life, there's
hope. Maybe some day I'll learn to support my known enemies. In that
case I'll join up with your Trotskyite Party. I want to thank you for a
very interesting discussion.

Trotskyite: Don't mention it. Always glad to spread Trotskyite
enlightenment.
